Title: 英文版样板

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16624v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 02:11:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
·1 ·

# MR -GVNO: A Geometry -Aware Variational Physics -informed 

# Neural Operator for Mindlin –Reissner Plates on Irregular Domains 

Siqi  WANG  a, Daobo SUN  b, Yizheng WANG  c, Yilong ZHANG  b, Yabin JIN  a, Xiaoying ZHUANG  a,d,

Timon  RABCZUK  e*     

> aInstitute of Computational Mechanics × AI & College of Intelligent Robotics and Advanced Manufacturing, Fudan University,
> Shanghai 200433, China
> bSchool of Aerospace Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China
> cDepartment of Engineering Mechani cs, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
> dInstitute of Photonics, Department of Mathematics and Physics, Leibniz University, Hannover, Germany
> eInstitute of Structural Mechanics, Bauhaus -Universitä t Weimar, Marienstr. 15, D -99423, Weimar, Germany

Abstrac t: Plate and shell structures are widely used in aerospace, mechanical equipment, civil engineering, and 

related fields. Rapid response prediction for such structures under complex geometries, heterogeneous materials, and 

varying loading conditions is of sign ificant engineering importance. The conventional finite element method (FEM) 

provides an effective tool for solving plate and shell problems. However, when the geometry, material parameters, or 

loading conditions change, the model usually needs to be recon structed and resolved, leading to high computational 

costs and limiting its applicability to rapid design iterations. To address this issue, this study proposes a

geometry -aware variational neural operator for Mindlin –Reissner plate problems, termed MR -GVN O.  The proposed 

method encodes the plate  domain geometry using boundary point clouds and incorporates a material encoder, a load 

encoder, and a scalar -parameter branch to handle spatially random material fields, spatially varying pressure loads, 

and sample -wise spatially uniform physical parameters. Through multi -branch point  cloud encoding and a

cross -attention mechanism, MR -GVNO fuses geometric, material, loading, and query  point information, and predicts 

the  transverse deflection  and rotational responses  at arbitrary query locations. During training, MR -GVNO does not 

rely on any labeled solution data. Instead, a variational physics -informed loss is constructed from the discretized total 

potential energy of the Mindlin –Reissner plate, enabling purely physi cs -driven training.  Compared with neural 

operators defined on regular grids,  MR -GVNO directly processes irregular point clouds and allows different physical 

fields to be discretized on different point sets, avoiding forced interpolation onto a common grid  or point cloud . The 

proposed method is systematically validated on  single -hole plate s,  double -hole plate s, and L -shaped plates, covering 

various cases including homogeneous materials, random material fields, uniform loads, and random loads. The 

results dem onstrate that MR -GVNO can accurately predict plate responses, achieve full  field inference for new 

samples within milliseconds, and exhibit favorable cross -geometry generalization capability. 

Keywords:  Mindlin –Reissner  plate, Neural operator, Machine learning, Transformer , Partial differential equation 

1.  In troduction 

Plate and shell structures are widely used in aerospace  [1] , ma rine  [2] , civil  [3] , and mechanical engineering sys-

tems  [4]  because of their high stiffness to weight ratio and excellent load carrying efficiency. Accurate prediction of 

their deformation, rotations, and related mechanical responses is of great importance for structural design, safety as-

sessment, and performance  optimization. Many physical phenomena can be modeled by partial differential equations 

(PDEs)  [5] , and the mechanical response of plate and shell structures is no  exception. As a classical numerical meth-

od for solving PDEs, the finite element method (FEM) has achieved remarkable success in problems involving com-

plex boundary conditions, material properties, and geometric configurations, owing to its accuracy and rob ustness. 

However, in many engineering scenarios, structural responses need to be repeatedly evaluated under varying geome-

tries, load distributions, material parameters, or boundary conditions. Such parametric simulations are often essential 

for design opti mization, uncertainty quantification, inverse analysis, and real -time decision making. Although 

high -fidelity finite element models are reliable, repeatedly solving a large number of plate and shell problems can be 

computationally expensive, especially whe n fine meshes, holes, cutouts, or irregular boundaries are involved. 

In recent years, AI4PDEs has become a major direction in AI for Science, leading to several deep learning para-

digms for solving PDEs. In general, these methods can be categorized into thr ee groups:  Physics -informed  Neural 

Networks (PINNs)  [6] , neural operators  [7] [8]  and  Physics -informed  Neural Operators (PINO)  [9] . The centra l idea 

of PINNs is to use neural networks as  universal  function approximators to directly solve PDEs, whereas neural oper-

ators and PINO aim to learn mappings between families of input functions and output functions.  Several studies have 

applied strong form  or energy form PINN methods to predict the responses of plate and shell structures  [10] [11] [12] .      

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: sqwang25@m.fudan.edu.cn (Siqi Wang), timon.rabczuk@uni -weimar.de (Timon Ra bczuk )·2·

By embedding the governing equations, boundary conditions, or variational energy functionals into the loss function, 

these methods provide promising alternatives for such problems. However, existing PINN based methods are essen-

tially designe d to solve sp ecific boundary value problems. When the geometry, material type, or boundary condition 

changes, the network usually needs to be retrained or reoptimized for the new physical configuration. This problem 

specific nature limits their efficiency in large scal e parametric studies. Therefore, a more general framework is need-

ed to efficiently predict plate and shell responses under different physical configurations. 

Neural operators and PINO provide promising solutions to this type of problem. According to  their architectures, 

neural operators can be broadly divided into three categories  [13] : integral kernel operators based on grids or graphs, 

deep networks based on  universal approximation theory, and Transformer -based neural operators. Among them, the 

Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)  [7]  and the Deep Operator Network (DeepONet)  [8]  are representative methods of 

the first two categories, respectively.  FNO computes kernel integrals using the fast Fourier transform (FFT), which 

gives it high  training efficiency. However, the  vanilla  FNO is mainly applicable to rectangular domains discretized 

on uniform grids. Although FNO can be extended to more general geometries through domain embedding, domain 

mapping, or nearest neighbor strategies, as in  DAFNO  [14] , Geo -FNO  [15] , and gFNO+  [16] , it still essentially per-

forms operator learning on a rectangular computational domain. DeepONet relies on the universal approximation 

theorem for operators and imposes relatively fewer restrictions on the shape of the computational  domain. Neverthe-

less, its training is usually confined to a specific geometry. 

Real -world problems are often characterized by complex and highly variable geometries. To overcome the geo-

metric limitations of the neural operators discussed above, a number of  geometry -aware  neural operators have been 

proposed. For example, graph neural operators (GNO)  [17]  learn input and output functions on graph representations; 

GINO  [18]  represents geometry using both signed distance functions (SDFs) and point clouds; Geom -DeepONet  [19] 

incorporates SDFs and Sinusoidal Representation Networks (SIREN) into the DeepONet framework; and  Phys-

ics -Informed Geometry -Aware Neural Operator  (PI -GANO ) [20]  further integrates physical constraints into  geome-

try -aware  operator learning. In addition, several Transformer -based neural operators have been developed for PDE 

problems on general geometries . The General Neural Operator Transformer (GNOT)  [21]  encodes PDE parameters 

and domain geometry as tokens and achieves favorable performance on multiple datasets.  Transolver  [22]  focuses 

attention on physics aware tokens, thereby substantially reducing computational complexity. More recently, the Ge-

ometry Informed Neural Ope rator Transformer (GINOT)  [23]  represents geometry using boundary point clouds of 

the computational domain, providing a flexible and scalable approach for solving PDEs on complex geometries. 

Although the above methods are  capable of solving PDEs on various computational domains, training neural oper-

ators usually requires a large amount of data. In many engineering applications, acquiring such data is highly expen-

sive and, in some cases, even impractical. Inspired by PINNs,  Li et al. proposed the  Physics -informed  Neural Opera-

tor (PINO). PINO directly incorporates physical equations into the training process of FNO, substantially reducing 

the amount of labeled data required for training. In certain cases, it can even be traine d without any labeled data. 

Similarly, PI -DeepONet proposed by Wang et al.  [24]  can be regarded as a representative example of a  phys-

ics -informed  neural operator b ased on the DeepONet architecture.  However, these methods rely on the strong form of 

the governing equations, which inevitably introduces high -order derivatives. Weak form neural operators, such as the 

finite element operator network  [25]  and the Variational  Physics -informed  Neural Operator (VINO)  [26] , provide an 

effective w ay to avoid this issue. VINO directly incorporates the variational form of physical laws into the learning 

process and can be trained without any labeled data. Nevertheless, since VINO is built on the FNO architecture, its 

adaptability to different geometr ies remains limited. 

The above studies indicate that  geometry -aware  neural operators can, to some extent, overcome the limitations of 

regular grids and fixed computational domains, while  physics -informed  neural operators can substantially reduce the 

depend ence on hig h-fidelity solution labels. However, neural operator architectures that enable label free training 

across different computational domains remain very limited. In addition,  geometry -aware  neural operators for 

Mindlin –Reissner plates on irregular  domains, trained without solution labels, still require further investigation. 

To address this issue, we propose a  geometry -aware  variational neural operator for Mindlin –Reissner plates on ir-

regular domains, termed MR -GVNO, namely the Mindlin –Reissner  Geom etry -aware  Variational Neural Operator. 

Inspired by GINOT, the proposed method takes point clouds as input, where the boundary point clouds of the plate 

mid -surface  are used to represent geometric information, thereby greatly improving the flexibility of the model. 

MR -GVNO is trained in an unsupervised physics -driven manner based on the discretized variational functional of 

Mindlin –Reissner plates, and no labeled dat a are required during the training process.  In addition, a material encoder, 

a load encoder, and a scalar parameter branch are introduced to provide a unified treatment of different input forms, 

including nonuniform materials, nonuniform loads, and  sample -level  variable uniform loads. The model directly pre-

dicts the  transverse deflection and rotations  of the Mindlin –Reissner plate at the corresponding query points. 

The main contributions of MR -GVNO can be summarized as follows: 

Flexible input and output:  MR -GVNO decouples the input point clouds from the query points, and employs 

multiple encoders and a solution decoder to support flexible input of multiple physical sources. 

Purely physics -driven training:  MR -GVNO enables unsupervised physics -driven training  based on a Trans-

former architecture and a discretized variational functional, without requiring labeled data. 

Promising  generalization performance:  MR -GVNO demonstrates generalization across different geometries, ·3 ·

load distributions, and material properties , and also shows promising performance in  out -of -distribution  (OOD )

problems. 

To the best of our knowledge, MR -GVNO is the first physics -informed neural operator based solver for thick plate 

problems. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Se ction  2 introduces the basic theory of elastic 

Mindlin –Reissner plates and several paradigms of operator learning. Section  3 presents GINOT and the proposed 

MR -GVNO model. Section  4 provides a comprehensive validation of MR -GVNO under different geometries, 

materials, and load distributions. Finally, Section  5 summarizes the advantages and limitations of MR -GVNO and 

discusses possible directions for future research. 

2.  Preparatory knowledge 

In this section, we first introduce the basic theory of elastic Mindlin –Reissner plate. Then,  according to whether 

physical laws are incorporated and how they are incorporated, several paradigms of operator learning are reviewed. 

2.1.  Theory of elastic  Mindlin –Reissner  plate 

Since the dimension of a plate in the thickness direction is much smaller than  its characteristic  mid -surface 

dimensions, appropriate kinematic assumptions are usually introduced based on three -dimensional elasticity theory 

to reduce the original three -dimensional continuum problem to a two -dimensional  mid -surface  problem. The 

class ical Kirchhoff –Love thin plate theory takes the plate  mid -surface  as the reference surface and assumes that 

straight lines initially normal to the  mid -surface  remain straight and normal to the deformed  mid -surface  after 

deformation. As a result, transverse  shear deformation is neglected. This assumption is reasonable for thin plates, but 

when the plate is relatively thick or transverse shear effects are no longer negligible, the Kirchhoff –Love theory may 

fail to accurately describe the structural response.  The Mindlin –Reissner plate theory extends the Kirchhoff –Love 

plate theory. Its key assumption is that normals to the  mid -surface  remain straight after deformation, but they are no 

longer required to remain perpendicular to the deformed  mid -surface . Therefo re, the rotations of the plate cross 

section and the gradients of the mid -surface deflection can be independent of each other, allowing transverse shear 

strains to exist. This makes the theory suitable for bending analysis of moderately thick plates. Z

> Y
> X
> O

Mid -surface 

> X
> Z

Transverse Normals x

# hx

# wx

   

> Fig .1.Kinematic assumptions of the Mindlin –Reissner plate theory. The transverse normals remain straight after deformation but
> are not required to remain perpendicular to the deformed mid -surface. The difference between the rotation of the deformed
> mid -surface normal, represented by the deflection gradient wx

 , and the  rotation of the transverse normal x

 defines the trans-

> verse shear strain component x

 .

As  show n in  Fig . 1, f or a small deformation Mindlin –Reissner plate defined over the mid -surface domain 2

R  

with thickness h , the plate theory uses the  transverse deflection w and two rotations x

 and y

 as independent 

unknowns to describe the displacement field of the plate. The bending curvature tensor is given by the spatial gradient 

of the rotation field as ,sym 

=   

(1)

where =[ , ]Tx y

   denotes the rotation vector and ( ) sym 

  denotes the symmetric gradient operator. The transverse 

shear strain is defined as ,w=  −

(2)

where w is the gradient of the  transverse deflection . For an isotropic linear elastic material, the Laméparameters 

under the plane stress assumption can be expressed as ·4 ·2

,2(1 ),(1 )

EE

= += −  

(3)

where E is Young’s modulus and  is Poisson’s ratio.  The bending strain energy density and the transverse shear 

strain energy density are  respectively given by ( ) ( ) 

> 32bend

1 tr 2 : ,2 12 

t  = +     

(4)shear 

1 ,2 s t=    

(5)

where 5 / 6 s = is the shear correction factor.  The total potential energy of the Mindlin –Reissner plate can be ex-

pressed as bend shear bend shear ext ] ,[ U Upw d W

> 

 = = +−  −+

 

(6)

where bend U denotes the bending energy, shear U denotes the transverse shear energy, p is the transverse load, w is 

the transverse deflection,  and ext W denotes the external work. 

2.2.  Neural operators 

The preceding subsection provides the mechanical model and energy functional used in this work. We next review 

neural operator formulations and physics -informed training paradigms, which form the learning framework of  our 

model .

Neural operators are well s uited for mapping infinite dimensional input functions to output functions evaluated at 

prescribed query points, which has broad applications in science and engineering. For example, the input function may 

represent the boundary condition of a PDE, while t he output corresponds to the solution field of interest. A neural 

operator can be expressed as :( ), u a →=

(7)

where a  denotes the input function, u  denotes the output function, and  is the neural operator 

parameterized by the trainable parameters  . For a query point Ωx  , the prediction of the neural operator can be 

written as ( ) ( )( ). u x a x=

> 

(8)

For a given training dataset ( ) ( ) 1{( , )} i i Nia u == , the supervised loss of a purely data -driven neural operator can be 

written as train 2data 1train 

,1( ) ( ) 

> Niii

a uN =

 =  −

(9)

where train N is the number of training samples, and  denotes the 2

L norm. 

Traditional neural operators are  purely data -driven, which makes them simple and flexible. However, training purely 

data -driven neural operators requires a large amount of high -fidelity data, which significantly limits their engineering 

applications. In many cases, generating such data ma y be expensive, unavailable, or restricted to low resolution 

observations. To address this difficulty, PINO  have been developed. In the following, we briefly introduce PINO. 

A parametric PDE can be written as [ ]( ) ( ), Ω,a u x f x x= 

(10 )

with the boundary condition [ ]( ) ( ), Ω,a u x g x x= 



(11 )

where a denotes the differential operator associated with the parameter a , and a denotes the boundary operator. 

The loss function of the strong  form PINO can be expressed as data data pde pde bc bc ( ) ( ) 2pde 1s( ) (-) 2bc p1de ,,,1( )[ ]( ) ( )1 [ ]( ) ( )    

> rb
> NjjajrNjjajb

u x f xNu x g x N

> ==

 = + +=  −=  −



(12 )·5 ·

where pde  and pde 

 ,data  and data 

 , and bc  and bc 

 denote the PDE residual loss, the data loss, the boundary 

condition loss, and their corresponding weights, respectively. The set ( ) 1{ } rNjjx = denotes the residual sampling points in 

the computational domain, while ( ) 1{ } bNjjx = denotes the boundary sampling points. rN and bN are the numbers of 

interior residual points and boundary points, respectively. 

In principle, the training of PINO does not require a data loss. In practice, howe ver, paired data are often still used 

during training to compute this term, because the strong form of the governing equations usually involves high -order 

derivatives  [9] . Without the data loss, the accuracy of strong form PINO may be insufficient. This motivates the de-

velopment of VINO  [26] . If a parametric PDE admits a variational functional, the corresponding variational loss can 

be written as ( ) ( )   

> train
> pde vΩΩ1train

1( ) ( ), ( )( ), ( )( ), dΩ ( ), ( )( ), ( )( ), dΓ ,     

> Niiiiiii

a x a x a x a x a x a xN  = − 

  =  +  

> 



(13 )

where  and  denote the variational integral kernels on the boundary and in the interior of the computational 

domain, respectively. 

The choice between the strong form loss pde-s  and the variational loss pde-v  depends on the na ture of the gov-

erning PDEs. In general, energy formulations are mainly available for steady state problems, and not all PDE sys-

tems admit a variational principle. Nevertheless, VINO usually achieves better efficiency and accuracy than strong 

form PINO, pri marily because variational formulations typically involve lower order derivatives, which improves the 

numerical stability of the training process. 

3.  Method 

3.1.  Geometry -Informed Neural Operator Transformer 

The core idea of GINOT is that it does not  directly model pairwise self -attention among all input points. Instead, 

the original geometry point cloud is first encoded into sN latent tokens through a point cloud geometry encoder, 

and the query points then interact with these l atent tokens through cross -attention. As a result, the computational 

complexity is reduced from the direct point to point interaction form 2

( )O N  [21]  to a form associated with the 

number of latent tokens, 2

( )s s q sO N N N N N + + . Since sN is usually much smaller than N , GINOT can achieve 

a significant efficiency advantage. Further discussion on computational complexity is provided in Appendix  B.Position encoding+Linear layer       

> SG
> Boundary point
> cloud ( Ng×d)(Ns×d)

Ng × C

> S&G
> Ns × Np × C
> Ns × Np × (C + d )
> MLP
> Ns × Np × C
> MLP
> Ns × C
> Q
> Cross attention
> Cross attention

… Q 

> Self attention
> Self attention
> Ns × C
> Ns × de
> Q
> K,V

…    

> Q
> K,V
> Linear layer
> (Ns×Np×d)

(a)     

> Input 1
> Input 2
> …
> Ns×d1
> Ns×d2
> Nq × de
> Cross attention
> Cross attention

… Q     

> K,V
> K,V
> Q
> Position
> encoding+ MLP
> Nq × de
> MLP Output
> (Nq×Co)
> Query point
> (Nq×d)
> Encoder
> …

(b) 

(c)   

> Encoder
> Ns×de
> MLP

Fig.  2. The architecture of the Geometry Informed Neural Operator Transformer (GINOT), where S and G denote sampling and 

grouping, respectively. (a) Geometry encoder based on boundary point clouds. (b) Solution decoder for query point prediction.  (c) 

Additional input encoders for incorporating auxiliary physical fields. 

As shown in  Fig.  2, GINOT mainly consists of an encoder and a decoder. Both components exploit the attention 

mechanism inherent in the Transformer architecture, which enables the model to focus on  relevant input information. ·6 ·

The attention mechanism is defined as Attention( , , ) softmax ,

> Te

QK Q K V Vd

 =    

(14 )

where q eN d

Q 

 is the  QUE RY  matrix, and , ekN d

K V 

 are the  KEY  and  VALUE  matrices, respectively. 

Here, ed denotes the embedding dimension, qN is the length of the query sequence, and kN is the length of the 

KEY  and  VALUE  sequences. Through this mechanism, query points can adaptively attend to the geometric features 

that are most relevant to their predictions. To improve  training stability, residual connections and layer normalization 

are usually introduced in each attention block. 

The geometry encoder takes boundary point clouds as input to extract the shape and boundary topology information 

of the solution domain. The bo undary point cloud is first processed by the sampling layer and the grouping layer. The 

sampling layer adopts iterative farthest point sampling (FPS). Specifically, one point is first randomly selected from the gN

boundary points, a nd then the point farthest from the already selected point set is iteratively selected until the 

number of sampled points reaches sN . Compared with random sampling, this strategy provides better coverage of the 

geometric boundary.  The selected points are then passed to the grouping layer to form sN point groups, each con-

taining pN points. For each group, the pN points are selected within a circle centered at the sampled point with a 

search radius r , which is a hyperparameter. If fewer than pN points are found within the circle, additional nearest 

points to the sam pled point are included until the number reaches pN . If more than pN points are found within the 

circle, the closest pN points are selected. Therefore, the output size of the grouping  layer is ×s pN N d , where d

denotes the spatial dimension. 

In addition, the boundary point cloud is passed through a Ne rf  positional encoding layer and a linear layer to obtain 

higher dimensional positional feature s, with an output size of gN C , where C denotes the channel dimension after 

positional encoding. Then, according to the indices obtained from the sampling and grouping operations, the corre-

sponding local geometric information is extracted, resulting in a tensor of size ×s pN N C . This tensor is concate-

nated with the output of the grouping layer.  The combined tensor is then passed through a series of multilayer per-

ceptron layers to aggregate the information within each group, reducing the pN dimension to 1 . The final output has a 

size of sN C .

In addition to geometry, GINOT can also encode input functions defined on the computational domain. These input 

functions may represent coefficients, source terms, material parameters, or externa l load fields. The outputs of these 

additional encoders are concatenated with the output of the geometry encoder, and an MLP is then used to aggregate 

information from both the geometry and the additional inputs. The aggregated representation is subsequent ly used as 

the KEY and VALUE in the cross -attention blocks of the decoder. 

The solution decoder predicts the solution field at query points conditioned on the encoded geometric features and 

additional inputs. The query points, with a size of qN d , are first passed through positional encoding and an MLP to 

generate a query matrix of size eqN d , where qN denotes the number of query points and de is the embedding 

dimension. The query matrix is  then fed into the cross -attention layers, where geometric information from the geom-

etry encoder is incorporated. The attention mechanism enables the query points to focus on the most relevant geometric 

features. Finally, another MLP decodes the output of t he cross -attention layers into the solution field at the query 

points. 

3.2.  MR -GVNO 

Based on the attention mechanism, GINOT can represent the geometry of complex computational domains using 

boundary point clouds and predict the corresponding solution function  at arbitrary query points. Therefore, it has good 

adaptability to irregular geometries. However, GINOT is still essentially a data -driven operator learning framework 

and usually requires a large number of high -fidelity numerical solutions as supervised dat a. When such data are ex-

pensive to obtain in engineering problems, or when the problem involves a large number of combinations of geome-

tries, materials, and loads, purely data -driven training becomes limited. In addition, the inputs of Mindlin –Reissner 

pla te problems include not only the geometry, but also material parameter fields, transverse load fields, and  sam-

ple -level  varying mean parameters. Therefore, based on the GINOT architecture, this work constructs a

Mindlin –Reissner Geometry -aware Variational  Neural Operator, termed MR -GVNO, whose architecture is shown in 

Fig.  3.

Compared with conventional neural operators that use grid -based inputs, such as FNO, MR -GVNO directly de-

scribes geometry, material, and load information in the form of point clouds. For an  arbitrary plate domain, the model 

takes the geometric boundary point cloud, optional material point cloud, optional load point cloud, optional scalar ·7 ·

parameters, and a set of query points as inputs, and outputs the plate structural response at the query po ints. This 

structure avoids interpolation errors caused by interpolating different physical fields onto the same set of points, and 

reduces the computational cost as much as possible. Its general form can be written as : ( , , , , ) ( ), uG M L →

(15 )

where  denotes the MR -GVNO model with trainable parameters  ,G denotes the geometric boundary point 

cloud, M denotes the material point cloud, L denotes the load point cloud, and  denotes the  sample -level  scalar 

parameter vector.  denotes the query point cloud, and ( )u denotes the Mindlin –Reissner plate response obtained 

at the query points. Here, M ,L , and  are not always present simultaneously, but are selectively activated ac-

cording to the specific forms of the material and load in the problem considered. 

MR -GVNO predicts the  transverse deflection  and two rotational deg rees of freedom at each query point. The query 

point set is denoted by ( ) ( )

{( , ), 1,..., }. q qqx y q N= =

(16 )

The output at the q -th  query point can be expressed as ( ) ( ) ( )( )

[ , , ]u q q q Tx yq

w= 

(17 )

where ( )q

w denotes the  transverse deflection  at the q -th query point, and ( )qx

 and ( )qy

 denote the corresponding 

predicted rotations. Therefore, the outputs at all query points can be represented as an 3qN  matrix. Coordinate 

Geometry 

Material 

Load 

Load encoder 

Geometry encoder 

Material encoder 

Solution Decoder 

Point cloud input 

Query point cloud 

Calculation of loss 

functions over each element 

Summation over 

entire mid -surface 

Convergence 

criterion reached? 

Neural Operator Architecture 

Predicting nodal 

values on query points 

Yes 

No 

Output 

(Nq 3) 

Coordinate Coordinate 

Scalar parameter input 

Optional architectures         

> Fig. 3.Schematic of the proposed MR -GVNO framework for Mindlin –Reissner plates on irregular domains. The model takes point
> clouds as input, encodes the plate geometry using boundary point clouds, and selectively incorporates spatially va rying material and
> load fields through dedicated point cloud encoders. Sample -level scalar parameters, such as representative material properties and
> uniform pressure amplitudes, are processed by a lightweight scalar branch. The fused latent representation is used by the decoder to
> output the transverse deflection and rotations at arbitrary query points. During training, the predicted nodal responses are evaluated
> over triangular elements to compute the bending energy, transverse shear energy, and external work. The resulting total potential
> energy is then minimized as a variational physics -informed loss.

For geometric representation, MR -GVNO follows the geometry encoder structure of GINOT and uses the boundary 

point cloud of the plate mid -surface domain as  the geometric input. For a two -dimensional plate domain, the outer 

boundary, hole boundaries, and cutout boundaries jointly determine the shape and topology of the computational 

domain. Therefore, the input to the geometry encoder can be expressed as ( ) ( )

{( , ), 1,..., }. g gG gx y g N= =

(18 )

For plates with holes, the boundary points include both the outer boundary points and the hole boundary points. It 

should be emphasized that the  boundary  point cloud and the query point set serve different purposes. The  boundary 

point cloud is used to encode the shape of the computational domain, whereas the query point set specifies the locations 

where the model outp uts the structural response. 

The MR -GVNO architecture can selectively introduce a material encoder to handle spatially nonuniform material 

fields. When the material parameters vary spatially within the plate domain, the material field is constructed as a p oint 

cloud containing both spatial coordinates and physical parameters. The input to the material encoder can be expressed ·8 ·

as ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )

{( , , , ), 1,..., }, m m m mM mx y E m N= =



(19 )

where ( )m

E and ( )m

v denote Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio at the m -th material point, respectively, and mN

is the number of points in the  material point cloud. For homogeneous materials, if the material parameters are fixed for 

all samples, the material encoder does not need to be activated. If the material parameters are spatially uniform but their 

mean values vary among different samples,  they can be provided as scalar parameter inputs, without constructing a 

redundant material point cloud. 

Similarly, when the transverse pressure load is spatially nonuniform, MR -GVNO can use a load encoder to process 

the nonuniform load. If the pressure fi eld is defined on mesh nodes, the input to the load encoder can be expressed as ( ) ( ) ( ) 

{( , , ), 1,..., }, l l lL lx y P l N= =

(20 )

where ( ) l

P denotes the transverse pressure value at the l -th node, and lN is the number of points in the load point 

cloud. In this case, the load point cloud and the query points may share the same spatial coordinates, but they serve 

different purposes in the model. The query points are used to specify the locations where the s olution is evaluated, 

whereas the load point cloud is used to encode the input load function. When the load is spatially uniform but its am-

plitude varies across samples, that is, each sample has a different uniform pressure p, the load is no longer treated  as a 

point cloud input. Instead, it is passed into the scalar MLP branch as a  sample -level  scalar parameter. Therefore, for 

materials or loads that are spatially uniform but vary among samples, MR -GVNO represents them using a scalar pa-

rameter vector net net net [ , , ], E P=

(21 )

wher enet E ,net 

 , and net P denote Young’s modulu s, Poisson’s ratio, and the amplitude of the uniform pressure, 

respectively. In practical applications, if a scalar parameter is fixed for all samples, the corresponding component can 

either be set as a constant or be deactivated. In this way, MR -GVNO can  distinguish between spatial random field 

inputs and  sample -level  mean parameter inputs. The former are learned by point cloud encoders to capture their spatial 

distributions, whereas the latter are handled by a lightweight MLP to learn the influence of sca lar parameters on the 

structural response. This avoids redundant point cloud encoding for uniform fields, thereby reducing both the com-

putational cost and GPU memory consumption. 

In summary, MR -GVNO provides a flexible input and output formulation that can  accommodate point cloud inputs 

with different geometries, different numbers of points, and different spatial distributions. Geometry, material, load, and 

query points have different physical meanings in the model and can therefore be defined on different  point sets ac-

cording to the specific problem. Meanwhile, when multiple physical quantities are naturally defined at the same spatial 

locations, the corresponding encoders and decoder can share the same point cloud coordinates. In this way, MR -GVNO 

avoids t he restriction of forcing all input fields to be interpolated onto a unified grid or a unified point set, thereby 

improving its adaptability to complex plate structure problems. 

MR -GVNO departs from the conventional data -driven training strategy of neural  operators and is trained using a 

variational physics -informed loss. The computational domain is discretized by first order triangular elements, and 

shape functions are used to approximate the solution. Derivatives and integrals are then evaluated analytica lly at the 

element level. After the model predicts the output ( )

u q at the query points,  the bending strain energy and transverse 

shear strain energy are computed element by element using the triangular element connectivity. Together with the 

external work, these terms are used to construct the total potential energy functional Π . For clarity, Appendix A 

provides the element wise energy expressions based on three node linear triangular elements. No labeled data are 

required during the training of MR -GVNO. The network parameters are updated by minimizing the mean total p o-

tential energy over all training samples, and the loss function can be expressed as ( ) 1train 

,1( ) Π 

> Nii

N =

 = 

(22 )

where ( ) 

Π i denotes the total potential energy of the i -th training sample, and train N is the number of training sam-

ples.  Regarding the treatment of boundary conditions, Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed through a hard 

constraint in this work. On clamped boundaries, the network output is prescribed a priori to satisf y0u = . Therefore, 

no additional Dirichlet boundary penalty term is required during training. For free boundaries, the corresponding 

na tural boundary conditions are naturally reflected by the variational equilibrium relation of the total potential ener-

gy. 

4.  Results 

In this section,  three groups of numerical experiments  are presented to evaluate the performance and accuracy of the 

proposed  method. All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. The relative 2

L error 2

> L

e ,

the relative 1

H seminorm error 1

> H

e , and the energy norm error E

e are adopted as evaluation metrics, which are ·9 ·

defined as 222  

> pred true tru )e(Ω)(Ω

,

> LLL

w we w

−=

(23 )111 

> pred true true (Ω)(Ω)

| |,| |

> HHH

w we w

−=

(24 )int pred true int true 

( ) ,( )

u uuE

Ue U

−=

(25 )

where pred w and true w denote the  transverse deflection  fields obtained from the neural operator and FEM, respec-

tively. pred u and true u denote the Mindlin –Reissner  plate  responses obtained from the neural operator and FEM, 

including the  transverse deflection  and rotati ons. The relative 2

L error measures the overall discrepancy of the 

transverse deflection  field. The relative 1

H seminorm error evaluates the discrepancy between displacement gradi-

ents, thereby reflecting the  accuracy of local deformation patterns. The relative energy norm error measures the me-

chanical discrepancy between the predicted and reference Mindlin –Reissner responses through the reconstructed 

internal energy, including both bending and transverse shear  contributions.  Table  1 summarizes the hyperparameters 

used in different examples, and further discussion on the hyperparameters is provided in Appendix C.  Table  2 reports 

the numbers of input point clouds and the computational efficiency for different examples.  As the problem setting 

becomes more complex, additional enco der branches are activated to process material or load point clouds, which 

leads to an increase in training time.  Nevertheless, MR -GVNO achieves millisecond -level inference speed and pro-

vides a speedup of more than three orders of magnitude compared with F EM. 

Table  1 Training hyperparameters of the  MR -GVNO  models.  UM, RM, UL, and RL denote uniform material, random material, 

uniform load, and random load, respectively.                                                                            

> Hyperparameter
> Single -hole
> plate (UM,
> UL )
> Single -hole
> plate (UM,
> RL)
> Double -hole
> plate (UM,
> UL )
> Double -hole
> plate (UM,
> RL)
> L-shape dplate
> (RM, UL )
> L-shape dplate
> (RM, RL )
> Train/test dataset 500/100 500/100 500/100 500/100 1000/200 1000/200
> Epochs 500 500 500 500 500 500
> Batch size 32 32 32 32 32 32
> Initial learning rate 0.0005 0.0005 0.0005 0.0005 0.0005 0.0005
> Scheduler patience 25 25 25 25 25 25
> Scheduler factor 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7
> Geo metry encoder ( Ns/Np/r)16/18/0.2 256/18/0.2 128/18/0.2 256/18/0.2 128/18/0.2 128/18/0.2
> Other encoder s(Ns/Np/r)/256/64/0.2 /256/64/0.2 128/36/0.2 128/36/0.2
> Encoder/ Decoder cross -att.
> layers 2/4 2/4 2/4 2/4 2/4 2/4
> Encoder self -att. layers 222222

Table  2 Input point cloud sizes and computational efficiency of MR -GVNO  and FEM  for different examples.  Values in brackets 

denote the range of point numbers across different samples.                                                                  

> Single -hole plate
> (UM, UL )
> Single -hole plate
> (UM, RL)
> Double -hole
> plate (UM, UL )
> Double -hole
> plate (UM, RL)
> L-shape dplate
> (RM, UL )
> L-shape dplate
> (RM, RL )
> Ng320 320 [318, 384] [347 ,448 ]202 202
> Nq[3908, 6572] [3908, 6572] [4088, 7303] [5385 ,10011] [1892 ,2011] [1892 ,2011]
> Nm////[3582 ,5618] [3582 ,5618]
> Nl/[3908, 6572] /[5385 ,10011] /[1892 ,2011]
> Training (s/epoch) 1.82 4.42 2.25 5.63 5.51 6.88
> FEM (s/solution) 3.22 3.33 3.04 4.51 1.24 1.26
> Inference (s/solution) 7.4e -43.7e -31.1e -34.8e -31.9e -32.8e -3

The three examples progressively extend from cases with only geometric variations to more complex cases in which 

the geometry, material properties, and loads all vary. Different encoder branches are activated according to the varia-

tion forms of the geometr y, material, and load in each example. For the single hole and  double -hole plate s, only the 

geometry encoder is activated under uniform loading conditions. When the load is spatially random, the load encoder is 

further introduced. For the L -shaped plate ex amples with random materials, the material field is defined at the centers 

of triangular elements and is provided through the material encoder. When the load remains spatially uniform but its ·10 ·

amplitude varies across samples, it is introduced through the sc alar parameter branch. When the load is also repre-

sented as a spatial random field, both the material encoder and the load encoder are activated. 

To validate the results, finite element simulations are performed for all examples using the ope n-source libra ry 

FEniCS Shells  [27] , which provides a relatively simple implementation of typical plate and shell formulations. Mesh 

convergence studies are conducted for all re ported results to ensure the reliability of the finite element reference so-

lutions. It should be noted that the FEM results are used only for comparison with the predictions of the proposed 

method and are not used for training. 

4.1.  Single -hole plate 

We  first consider a plate with a random hole subjected to a uniform out -of -plane load, in order to test the 

adaptability of MR -GVNO to different plate geometries. The plate domain is 2

[0,5]  =  , and the thickness is 0.5 

mm. Since the plate thi ckness is one tenth of the in -plane dimension, the Kirchhoff –Love plate theory is not suitable 

for this problem. The Young’s modulus is 1000MPa E = and the Poisson’s ratio is 0.3 = . The outer boundary of 

the plate is ful ly clamped, and the boundary conditions can be expressed as 0, 0, 0,(at x=0, x=5, y=0, y=5). x yw = = = 

(26 )

The size, shape, and location of the hole vary randomly among different samples. The hole center, denoted by ( , )x yc c

, can take any position within the region 2

[1.25,3.75]  =  . This setting ensures that the entire hole remains 

inside the square plate and avoids being too close to the outer boundary. The hole boundary is defined by 64 points 

uniformly distributed in the angular direction. The coordinates of the hole boundary points, denoted by ( , )i ix y ,

which  can  be expressed as ( ) cos( ), ( )sin( ),         

> ixiiiiyiii

x c ry c r

= += +  

(27 )

where ir is the radius of the i -th boundary point, and (2 ) / 64 i i=  . For each sample, the radius ir can take 

arbitrary values within a prescribed range, and this range varies from sample to sample.  Fig.  4 shows the specific 

setup of this example, including the geome tries and boundary point clouds of different samples. (a) (b) 

Clamped 5 mm 31000 M 0Pa .

E ==   

> Fig. 4.Single -hole plate under uniform transverse pressure. (a) Loading and boundary condition configuration. (b) Boundary point
> clouds used as input to the geometry encoder.

4.1.1.  Homogeneous  plate  under uniform loading 

In this case, the  single -hole plate  is subjected to a uniform transverse pressure of  0.8  MPa. Since the material 

parameters and loading amplitude are fixed for all samples, only the geometry encoder is activated.  To  evaluate the 

accuracy of the MR -GVNO predictions, we compare the deflection w and the rotation magnitude x y= +  

obtained by MR -GVNO with the FEM reference solutions. 

Fig.  5 (c) –(e) highlight the best case, median case, and worst case in terms of the relative 2

L error. For the best 

case, the relative L₂ error is 0.50%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 1.67%, while the worst case has a 

relative 2

L error of 3.43%. Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 2.09%, with a standard deviation of ·11 ·

1.29%. The  mean relative 1

H seminorm error and energy norm error are 4.73% and 11.94%, respectively. (d)     

> (e)
> (c) (a)
> (b)
> Fig. 5.Single -hole plate with homogeneous material under uniform loading. (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b)
> Relative errors of the predictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case  

> (2

0.50% L

e = ); (d) median case ( 2 1.67% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 3.43% L

e = ).  From left to right, the subplots show   

> the surface plot of the transverse deflection, the load field distribution, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM reference solution, and
> the error.

4.1.2.  Homogeneous  plate  under  random loading 

For this case, we further consider the situation in which both the geometry and the load vary am ong samples.  The 

geometry setting remains the same as that of the single hole benchmark described above.  The load point cloud and the 

query point cloud share the same spatial coordinates, while the geometry of the Mindlin –Reissner  plate is encoded 

solely by feeding the boundary point cloud into the geometry encoder. The transverse load is sampled from Gaussian 

random fields (GRFs)  and rescaled to the range of  0 to 1.6 MPa , with a mean value of  0.8 MPa.  In this case, both the 

geomet ry encoder and the load encoder are activated. 

Fig.  6 (c) –(e) highlight the best case, median case, and worst case in terms of the relative 2

L error. For the best case, 

the relative 2

L error is 0.84%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 2.32%, while the worst case has a relative 2

L

error of 7.46%. Over all test samp les, the mean relative 2

L error is 2.66%, with a standard deviation of 1.45%. 

The average 1

H seminorm error and energy norm error are 5.39% and 11.66%, respectively. 

The results show that, when the uniform lo ad is extended to a spatially random load, the model needs to handle both 

geometric variations and spatial variations in the load distribution. Compared with the uniform loading case, the mean 

relative L₂ error increases only slightly, indicating that the  load encoder can effectively extract the influence of the GRF 

pressure field on the structural response. The increased error in the worst case is mainly attributed to the coupling 

between the complex hole boundary and local regions with high pressure. ·12 ·(d) 

> (e)
> (c) (a)
> (b)

Fig.  6. Single -hole plate  with homogeneous material under  random loading . (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b) 

Relative errors of the predictions. Distributions of the  transverse deflection w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case 

(2 0.84% L

e = ); (d) median case ( 2 2.32% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 7.46% L

e = ).  From left to right, the subplots show 

the surface plot of  the transverse deflection, the load distribution, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM reference solution, and the 

error. 

4.2.  Double -hole plate 

In this section, a case with more pronounced geometric variations is considered to further test the adaptability of 

MR -GVNO to different geometries. The plate domain, thickness, material properties, and clamped boundary condi-

tions are the same as those in the  single -hole plate  benchmark. Two holes are randomly generated in the plate, with 

their centers located within the re gion 2

[1.25,3.75]  . The distance from each hole boundary point to its corresponding 

center ranges from 0.2 to 1.15  mm . The holes are generated in a manner similar to that used in the  single -hole plate 

example, but here the two holes are allowe d to overlap. As a result, the dataset contains richer geometric topology 

variations, including separated holes, closely spaced holes, and merged -hole configurations. 

Fig.  7 shows the basic setup of this benchmark, including the loading and boundary condition configuration for the 

uniform -loading case and representative boundary point clouds used as input to the geometry encoder. (a) (b) 

Clamped 

5 mm 31000 M 0Pa .

E ==

Fig.  7. Double -hole plate  under uniform transverse pressure. (a) Loading and boundary condition configuration. (b) Boundary point 

clouds used as input to the geometry encoder. ·13 ·

4.2.1.  Homogeneous  plate  under uniform loading 

In this case, the  double -hole plate  is subjected to a uniform tr ansverse pressure of 0.8 MPa. Since the material pa-

rameters and load are fixed for all samples, only the geometry encoder is activated.  The results are shown in  Fig.  8. For 

the best case, the relative 2

L error is 0.98%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 3.64%, while the worst case 

has a relative 2

L error of 13.8%. Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 3.75%, with a standard deviation 

of 2.49%. The average 1

H seminorm error and energy norm error are 7.91% and 17.81%, respectively. (d)     

> (e)
> (c) (a)
> (b)
> Fig. 8.Double -hole plate with homogeneous material under uniform loading. (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b)
> Relative errors of the predi ctions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case  

> (2

0.98% L

e = ); (d) median case ( 2 3.64% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 13.8% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show 

> the surface plot of the transverse deflection, the load field distribution, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM reference solution, and
> the error.

4.2.2.  Homogeneous  plate  under random loading 

Simila rly, the load in this example is extended to GRF loading,  while the double  hole geometry setting remains 

unchanged.  The transverse load is generated from GRFs and rescaled to the range of 0 to 1.6 MPa, with a mean value of 

0.8 MPa.  In this case, the load e ncoder is further introduced in addition to the geometry encoder.  The transverse de-

flection and rotation magnitude obtained by MR -GVNO and FEM are shown in  Fig.  9. For the best case, median case, 

and worst case, the relative 2

L errors are 1.32%, 4.10%, and 21.89%, respectively. The mean relative 2

L error is 

4.78%, with a standard deviation of 3.13%. The mean relative 1

H seminorm error and energy norm error are 8.05% 

and 15.87%, respectively. 

Overall, the errors in the  double -hole plate  examples are higher than those in the  si ngle -hole plate  examples. This 

is because the positions, shapes, and overlap patterns of the two holes can significantly alter the local stiffness distri-

bution and deformation modes. In particular, when the holes are close to each other or overlap, stronge r local gradi-

ents may appear in the region between the holes, leading to larger mean relative 1

H seminorm errors and energy 

norm errors. Nevertheless, the mean relative 2

L error over the test set remains at a  relatively low level, indicating 

that MR -GVNO still has good overall predictive capability for complex geometries with  two  holes. ·14 ·(c) 

> (d)
> (e)
> (a)
> (b)

Fig.  9. Double -hole plate  with homogeneous material under  ra ndo m loading. (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b) 

Relative errors of the predictions. Distributions of the  transverse deflection w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case 

(2 1.32% L

e = ); (d) median case ( 2 4.10% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 21.89% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show 

the surface plot of the transverse deflection, the load field distribution, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM  reference solution, and 

the error. 

4.3.  L-shaped plate 

In this section, we further test the predictive capability of MR -GVNO when the geometry and material properties 

vary simultaneously. An L -shaped plate is constructed by removing an arbitrary  rectangular region from the up-

per -right corner of a square plate. The length and width of the removed rectangle both range from 1.25 to 2.75 mm. The 

left boundary of the plate is clamped, and the boundary condition can be expressed as 0, 0, 0,(at x=0). x yw = = = 

(28 )(a) (b) 

Clamped 

5 mm 

1.25 –2.75 mm 400 1800 MP 5. 4a0 1 0. 

E

= −= −

Fig.  10 . L -shaped plate under uniform transverse pressure. (a) Loading and boundary condition  configuration. (b) Boundary point 

clouds used as input to the geometry encoder. 

The material properties are allowed to vary over a wide range. The distributions of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s 

ratio are both generated from  GRFs  and rescaled to prescribed  ranges. Young’s modulus varies from 400 MPa to 

1800 MPa, and Poisson’s ratio varies from 0.1 to 0.45. In this benchmark, the geometry encoder and the material ·15 ·

encoder are activated. It should be noted that this example demonstrates a situation in which the  encoder input point 

cloud and the query points are located at different spatial positions. Specifically, the input point cloud of the material 

encoder is located at the center of each triangular element formed by the query points. Considering the complexi ty of 

the problem, 1000 training samples and 200 test samples are used to train MR -GVNO.  Fig.  10  shows the basic setup 

of this benchmark, including the loading and bo undary condition configuration for the variable -uniform -loading case 

and representative boundary point clouds used as input to the geometry encoder. 

4.3.1.  Heterogeneous plate under variable uniform loading 

In this case, the pressure is spatially uniform, but it s amplitude varies randomly from 0.01 to 0.02 MPa among 

different samples. Therefore, the load is not treated as a point cloud input. Instead, the uniform pressure amplitude is 

introduced through the scalar parameter branch.  The results of this case are sh own in  Fig.  11 . For the best case, the 

relative 2

L error is 0.34%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 2.21%, while the worst case has a relative 2

L

error of 10.7%. Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 2.41%,  with a standard deviation of 1.57%. The 

average relative 1

H seminorm error and energy norm error are 3.19% and 11.09%, respectively. (c)       

> (d)
> (e)
> (a) (b)
> Fig. 11 .L-shaped heterogeneous plate under variable uniform loading. (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b) Relative
> errors of the predictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case  

> (2

0.34% L

e = ); (d) median case ( 2 2.21% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 10.7% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show       

> the surface plot of the transverse deflection, the Young’s modulus distribution, the Poisson’s ratio distribution, the MR -GVNO
> prediction, the FEM reference solution, and the error. ·16 ·

4.3.2.  Heterogeneous plate under random loading 

We further assume that the load, Young’s modulus, and Poisson’s ratio all follow GRFs, in order to evaluate the 

performance of  MR -GVNO in a more general setting.  In this case, the geometry, Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, and 

load distribution all vary among samples. The load field is generated from GRFs and provided to the model through the 

load encoder, while the material fiel ds are still handled by the material encoder. Therefore, the model needs to simul-

taneously process three types of nonuniform inputs, namely geometry, material properties, and load. 

As shown in  Fig.  12 , the relative 2

L error of the best case is 0.45%. The relative 2

L error is 3.04% for the median 

case and 13.5% for the worst case. Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 3.56%, with a standard devia-

tion of 2.49%. The  average 1

H seminorm error and ene rgy norm  error are 4.45% and 11.64%, respectively. 

Although the errors are slightly higher than those in the previous case, MR -GVNO still provides accurate predic-

tions. The results show that the multi -branch encoding and latent feature fusion mechanism can effectively integrate 

physical information from di fferent sources. For linear elastic small -deformation Mindlin –Reissner plate problems, 

MR -GVNO can effectively predict the structural response when the geometry, material properties, and load distribu-

tion vary simultaneously. (c)      

> (d)
> (e)
> (a) (b)
> Fig. 12 .L-shaped heterogeneous plate under random loading. (a) Evolution of the loss function during training. (b) Relative errors
> of the predictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case ( 2 0.45% L

e = ); (d)  

> median case ( 2

3.04% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 13.5% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show the surface plot of the       

> transverse deflection, the Young’s modulus distribution, the Poisson’s ratio distribution, the load field distribution, the MR -GVNO
> prediction, the FEM reference solution, and the error. ·17 ·

4.4.  Out -of -distribution  generalization 

In the results presented above,  the training and test datasets are sampled from the same data distribution, which can 

be regarded as an in -distribution (ID) setting. In engineering practice, however, it is difficult for the training distribu-

tion to fully cover all possible practical scen arios. Therefore, we expect the model to maintain good generalization 

capability when facing out -of -distribution (OOD) problems, such as geometries, parameter ranges, or input conditions 

that are not observed during training. 

4.4.1.  From  double -hole plate s to  single -hole plate s

As shown in  Fig.  13 , in this case, MR -GVNO is trained using 500  double -hole plate  samples under uniform loading 

and is then directly evaluated  on 100  single -hole plate  test cases under uniform loading. For the best case, the relative 2

L

error is 0.63%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 1.91%, while the worst case has a relative 2

L error of 

5.77%. Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 2.23%, with a standard deviation of 1.32%. The average 1

H

seminorm error and energy norm error are 5.08% and 13.15%, resp ectively. (c)       

> (d)
> (e)
> (a)
> (b)
> Train
> Test
> Clamped
> 5 mm
> Clamped 5 mm
> Fig. 13 .OOD prediction from double -hole plate s to single -hole plate s. (a) OOD prediction setting . (b) Relative errors of the pre-
> dictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case ( 2 0.63% L

e = ); (d) median  

> case ( 2

1.91% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 5.77% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots sho w the surface plot of the transverse 

> deflection, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM reference solution, and the error.

4.4.2.  From  single -hole plate s to  double -hole plate s

In this section, MR -GVNO is trained using 500  single -hole plate  samples under uniform loading and is then directly 

evaluated on 100  double -hole plate  test samples under uniform loading. For the best case, the relative 2

L error is 

1.20%. For the median case, the relative 2

L error is 5.64%, while the worst case has a relative 2

L error of 11.8%. 

Over all test samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 5.56%, with a standard deviation of 2.81%. The average 1

H

seminorm error and energy norm error are 16.50% and 43.74%, respectively. ·18 ·(c)      

> (d)
> (e)
> (a)
> (b)
> Train
> Test
> Clamped
> 5 mm
> Clamped 5 mm
> Fig. 14 .OOD prediction from single -hole plate s to double -hole plate s. (a) OOD prediction setting. (b) Relative errors of the pre-
> dictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case ( 2 1.20% L

e = ); (d) median  

> case ( 2

5.64% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 11.8% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show the surface plot of the transverse 

> deflection, the MR -GVNO prediction, the FEM reference solution, and the error.

4.4.3.  OOD prediction for L -shaped plates 

In this section, we further  consider a more challenging geometric OOD problem. In the previous L -shaped plate 

example, the training geometries were generated by removing a rectangular region from the upper right corner of a 

square plate, where both the length and width of the rectang ular cutout varied from 1.25 to 2.75. To evaluate the 

generalization capability of the model under a stronger geometric distribution shift, the MR -GVNO model trained on 

the L -shaped plates with small cutouts is directly applied to predict L -shaped plates w ith larger cutouts, where both the 

length and width of the removed rectangle range from 2.75 to 4.25  mm . Meanwhile, the test samples still use spatially 

uniform loads with sample dependent amplitudes, and the material parameters are still generated from Ga ussian ran-

dom fields. 

The OOD prediction results for this case are shown in  Fig.  15 . For the best case, the relative 2

L error is 1.48%. For 

the median case, the relative 2

L error is 10.9%, while the worst case has a relative 2

L error of 50.6%. Over all test 

samples, the mean relative 2

L error is 12.5%, with a standard deviation of 8.93%. The average 1

H seminorm error 

and energy norm error are 16.97% and 52.1 3%, respectively. 

For this highly challenging geometric OOD prediction problem, although the 2

L error of the worst case reaches 

50.6%, it is worth noting that the relative 2

L error of the median case is only  10.9%, and the mean relative 2

L error is 

also only 12.5%. This indicates that, in this problem, most test samples can still obtain relatively reliable predictions 

under the OOD setting, while highly unreliable predictions occur only  in a small number of test samples. ·19 ·(c) 

(d)

(e) 

Clamped 

(a) (b) 

Train 

Test 

Clamped 

5 mm 

1.25 – 2.75 mm 

2.75 – 4.25 mm 

5 mm      

> Fig. 15 .OOD prediction from small cutout to large cutout L -shaped plates .(a) OOD prediction setting. (b) Relative errors of the
> predictions. Distributions of the transverse deflection

w and the rotation magnitude  : (c) best case ( 2 1.48% L

e = ); (d)  

> median case ( 2

10.9% L

e = ); and (e) worst case ( 2 50.6% L

e = ). From left to right, the subplots show the surface plot of the      

> transverse deflection, the Young’s modulus distribution, the Poisson’s ratio distribution, the MR -GVNO prediction, th e FEM ref-
> erence solution, and the error.

4.4.4.  Discussion 

Overall, MR -GVNO shows favorable cross geometry extrapolation capability, while its generalization performance 

is closely related to the degree of discrepancy between the training and test distributions.  For plate problems with holes, 

the model can provide relatively accurate predictions without retraining. This indicates that the geometric features 

learned by MR -GVNO are not limited to the specific hole shapes observed in the training set. Instead, the m odel can 

capture, to some extent, the relationship among hole boundaries, effective load carrying regions, and global defor-

mation patterns. 

In addition, the prediction accuracy from  double -hole plate s to  single -hole plate s is better than that from  single -hole 

plate s to  double -hole plate s.  This can be mainly attributed to the richer geometric diversity in the double  hole training ·20 ·

set. It includes separated holes, closely spaced holes, and overlapping holes, some of which re semble single  hole  like 

configurations. Therefore, the learned geometric representation covers part of the deformation patterns appearing in 

single -hole plate s. In contrast, extrapolating from  single -hole plate s to  double -hole plate s requires the model to  handle 

hole –hole interactions and local stiffness weakening patterns that are absent from the training set.  As a result, the 1

H

seminorm error and energy norm error increase more significantly. 

The OOD test for L -shaped plates repre sents a more challenging geometric extrapolation problem. As the size of the 

upper right cutout increases significantly, the effective load carrying region, the transmission path of boundary con-

straints, and the local bending mode of the plate all change.  Therefore, the worst case error in this example is much 

higher than that in the  ID  tests. Nevertheless, under this strong extrapolation scenario, the median 2

L error remains 

10.9%, and the mean 2

L error is 12 .5%, indicating that the model can still provide informative predictions for most 

large cutout samples. However, when the test geometries deviate substantially from the training distribution, the pre-

diction reliability of MR -GVNO decreases. 

In summary, MR -GVNO demonstrates promising cross geometry extrapolation potential, especially when there is a 

moderate discrepancy between the training and test distributions. In such cases, the model can maintain relatively 

stable prediction accuracy. Meanwhile, cross g eometry extrapolation is not unconditional, but is closely related to the 

problem gap, the extent of geometric topology variation, and the complexity of local responses. For stronger geometric 

distribution shifts, the reliability of the model on new geomet ric distributions may be further improved by expanding 

the coverage of training geometries, introducing a small number of target domain samples for fine -tuning, or incor-

porating more efficient training sample selection strategies. 

5.  Conclusions 

In this work , we propose MR -GVNO, an operator learning framework for predicting the responses of 

Mindlin –Reissner plates under complex geometries and multiple sources of parameter variations. The framework 

adopts a point cloud encoder decoder architecture, in which bo undary point clouds are used to represent the structural 

geometry. Material fields, load fields, and scalar parameter inputs can be flexibly incorporated according to the specific 

problem, leading to a unified and scalable neural operator modeling strategy . Compared with methods that rely on fixed 

grids or regular computational domain representations, MR -GVNO can more naturally adapt to irregular geometric 

boundaries and irregular computational domains represented by boundary point clouds, showing strong ge ometric 

adaptability and flexibility in input representation. More importantly, the proposed framework does not rely on paired 

high -fidelity supervised data. Instead, it is trained in a purely physics -driven manner based on the variational energy 

functiona l of Mindlin –Reissner plates, thereby overcoming the dependence of conventional neural operator methods 

on large amounts of labeled data. Numerical results show that MR -GVNO can not only effectively learn the structural 

response mapping within the training  distribution, but also exhibits good robustness and generalization potential. 

Although MR -GVNO demonstrates promising performance, several limitations remain. First, the current variational 

loss is mainly constructed from the small deformation bending ene rgy and transverse shear energy of 

Mindlin –Reissner plates, while the membrane energy term is not explicitly included. Therefore, the present framework 

cannot be directly applied to problems dominated by in -plane loads, membrane stresses, or strong bending  membrane 

coupling. In future work, the current framework can be further extended to Mindlin –Reissner shell theory by incor-

porating membrane strain energy, surface geometric metrics, and shell curvature related terms, so as to handle more 

general plate and  shell structure problems. Second, the current model is based on the assumptions of linear elasticity 

and small deformation Mindlin –Reissner plate theory. Its variational loss adopts linear curvature rotation and trans-

verse shear strain relations, and the  total potential energy is constructed in the initial configuration. For large deflection 

or large rotation problems, the deformed geometric configuration affects the structural stiffness, load transfer path, and 

mechanical equilibrium relation, while the b ending response may be strongly coupled with in -plane stretching. 

Therefore, the current energy formulation, which only takes transverse deflection and rotations as outputs, is difficult 

to directly apply to strongly geometrically nonlinear problems. Futur e work may introduce nonlinear strain dis-

placement relations, in -plane displacement degrees of freedom, incremental loading or configuration update strategies, 

and further construct the corresponding nonlinear weak form energy or residual constraints to im prove the applicability 

of the method to large deformation plate and shell problems. In addition, the probability density function (PDF) of the 

input point distribution generally affects the prediction accuracy of point -cloud -based neural operators  [28] . In the 

numerical experiments of this work, the point distributions of the encoder and decoder inputs are close to uniform 

distributions. The results indicate that moderate deviations from un iform point distributions do not lead to significant 

accuracy degradation. Nevertheless, a more appropriate arrangement of the encoder and decoder point distributions 

may further improve training efficiency and prediction accuracy. Although the proposed me thod exhibits certain OOD 

extrapolation capability, its prediction accuracy may still decrease when the discrepancy between the training and test 

distributions becomes too large. Future work may improve the adaptability of the model to new distributions by  in-

corporating a small number of target domain samples for fine -tuning  [29]  or adopting warm start strategies 

[30] [31] [32] . Recently, continua l learning has also been introduced into PINOs  [33]  and has significantly improved 

their performance on OOD problems. This idea can be further combined with MR -GVN O to enhance its generalization 

capability and continual adaptation ability under distribution shifts. ·21 ·

In summary, MR -GVNO provides a promising new paradigm for constructing scalable operator learning models for 

plate and shell mechanics. The proposed meth od achieves a good integration of geometric representation, flexible input 

extension, physics -driven training, and extrapolative generalization, and is expected to provide effective support for 

rapid response prediction of complex engineering structures. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 

appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgments 

The study was supported by  the  scho larship from  Fudan  University. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Appendix A.  Element -wise energy evaluation for Mindlin –Reissner plates 

In this work, the model is trained by minimizing a functional derived from the variational formulation of the gov-

erning PDE. Inspired by the finite element method, the variational formulation discretizes the computational domain 

and uses shape functions to  evaluate derivatives and integrals analytically. This enables the model to be trained without 

labeled solution data. For clarity, we derive the expression of the loss function in this appendix. MR -GVNO is designed 

to predict the transverse deflection and  two rotations at a set of query nodes on the Mindlin –Reissner plate :((( ) )) ( )

[ , , ] . u q q q Tx yq

w= 

(29 )

The total potential energy is written as bend shear ext .U U W = + −

(30 )

For the Mindlin –Reissner plate problem, the variational formulation involves only first order derivatives. T herefore, 

three node linear triangular elements are used for the discrete energy evaluation. Following an element wise variational 

strategy, the plate domain is divided into eN triangular elements, and the total potential energy can be written as ( )   

> bend shear ext 11

Π Π .      

> eeNNeeeeee

U U W 

> ==

=  =  + −

(31 )

For a three node triangular element, t he nodal values of a scalar field  are interpolated by linear shape functions as 31

ˆ ,( , ) ( , ) Ne e ea aa

x y N x y 

> =

=  =

 

(32 )

where       

> 123123

.,N   

> Teeee

N N N= =  

   

(33 )

The gradients of the linear shape functions are constant within each element. Therefore ˆ ,Be ee=

 

(34 )

with 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 

.B x x xey y y

N N NN N N

 =   

(35 )

The three Mindlin –Reissner unknowns are approximated in the same manner :ˆˆˆ .,,

Nw NN     

> eeeexxeeyy

w ===

 

θ

(36 )

The bending curvatures are obtained from the gradients of the rotation field :( ) 

> ,,,,

1 .2,,        

> eexx x x eeyy y y eeexy x y y x

=== +    

(37 )

For an isotropic plate under the plane stress assumption, the element wise material parameters are given by ·22 ·2

,2(1 ).(1 ) 

> eeeeeee

EE

= += −  

(38 )

For homogeneous plates, eE E= and e =  . For spatially varying material fields, eE and ev are taken as element 

wise constants.  The bending energy of element e is then computed as ( ) ( )    

> 32222bend

1 2 ( ) ( ) 2( ) ,2 12             

> eeeeeeeexx yy exx yy xy

hU A  = + + + +       

(39 )

where eA is the area of the triangular element.  The transverse shear strain is defined as ˆ ,e e e

w= −  

(40 )

or equivalently, ,,

,.        

> eeexxxeeeyyy

ww

= −= −

(41 )

The corresponding shear energy is shear Ω

1 Ω,2 e   

> eeese

U h d= 

   

(42 )

where 56 

> s

= is the shear correction factor. Since w and the rotations are linearly interpol ated, this integral can be 

evaluated analytically. Define Ω

2 1 1

Ω 1 2 1 , 12 1 1 2

M N N  

> e
> Tee

Ad

  = =    

# 

(43 )

and Ω

1

Ω 1 . 3 1

m N 

> e
> Tee

Ad

    = =       

# 

(44 )

Then the shear energy can be written as shear 

1 ( ) ( ) 2( ) ( ) ( ) ,ˆ ˆ ˆ

2

m M Mm                       

> TeexeeTeeTeTeeTeseexexyeyTeey

U h A w w w

   = − + +     

   

θ θ θ θ θθ

(45 )

where ˆ ˆBe eew w= is constant within the element. For a transverse pressure field ( , )p x y  , the external work acting 

on element e is ext Ω Ω.  

> e
> eee

W p w d = 

(46 )

If the pressure is represented by nodal values 1 2 3 .p Te e e e

p p p =  

(47 )

Then ext ) .(w M p e e T eeW =

(48 )

Therefore, the elemen t contribution to the total potential energy is bend shear ext .Π e e ee U U W= + −

(49 )

For a training set with train N input samples, the energy based loss is defined as train ( )       

> ,( ) ,( ) ,( ) bend shear ext train 11

1 .        

> ieNNeieieiie

U U WN = =

 =   + − 

(50 )

Thus, the nodal responses predic ted by the network can be transformed into a differentiable discrete total potential 

energy through shape function interpolation and element wise integration. This discrete total potential energy is used as 

the physics training objective to optimize the ne twork parameters, without introducing finite element displacement or 

rotation labels as supervised terms. Therefore, the finite element solutions are used only for accuracy evaluation in the 

testing stage, while the training process is fully driven by the  variational energy functional of the Mindlin –Reissner 

plate. ·23 ·

Appendix  B. Discussion on computational complexity 

The computational cost of MR -GVNO mainly consists of two parts: the cost of point cloud sampling and grouping, 

and the cost of  attention operations. In the sampling  and  grouping layers, the FPS and ball query operations have 

complexities of 2

( )sO N  and ( )s gO N N  , respectively. Compared with SDF type geometry processing methods, this 

point cloud sampling and grouping procedure usually introduces lower additional computational overhead. Further 

discussion on this part can be found in  [23] .

For the attention cost, MR -GVNO uses an encoder decoder architecture to reduce the 2

( )O N  complexity of con-

ventional Transformer -based neural operators to a form associ ated with sN . Specifically, in the geometry encoder, the 

cross -attention layers mainly operate between sN sampled tokens and gN boundary points, and this part has a 

complexity of ( )s gO N N  . The self -attention layers operate among sN latent tokens, with a complexity of 2

( )sO N  .

In the solution decoder, qN query points are first encoded into a query matrix of size q eN d , and then interact 

through cross -attention with the  KEY  and  VALUE  matrices of size s eN d produced by the encoder. Therefore, the 

main complexity of  the solution decoder is ( )q sO N N  . For the most basic case with homogeneous material and uni-

form loading, MR -GVNO only uses the boundary geometry point cloud as the encoder input, and its computational 

complexity can be expressed as 2

( ). s g s q sO N N N N N + +

(51 )

In more complex Mindlin –Reissner plate problems, the numbers of points in the geometry, material, and load point 

cl ouds may be different. For the most complex case, where the material and load are represented by different point 

clouds, the total computational complexity can be expressed as 2

[ ( ) 3 ]. s g m l q sO N N N N N N+ + + +

(52 )

This expression indicates that the complexity of MR -GVNO mainly grows linearly with the number of input points 

and query points, while the quadratic complexity only appears among the relati vely small number of latent tokens. 

Therefore, even in complex cases where geometry, material, and load point clouds are considered simultaneously, 

MR -GVNO can still maintain good computational efficiency. 

Appendix  C. Discussion on the effect of  hyperparameters 

MR -GVNO involves several hyperparameters. To analyze the influence of different hyperparameter settings on 

model performance, we use the  single -hole plate  example with homogeneous material under uniform loading as a 

representative case. The  effects of the number of attention layers, the point cloud sampling and grouping parameters sN

,pN , and r , as well as the input point cloud density, are discussed. 

Table  3 summarizes the prediction accuracy and training efficiency of MR -GVNO under different attention layer 

settings. It can be observed that encoder cross attention plays an importan t role in model performance. When the en-

coder cross attention block is removed, the prediction error increases significantly, indicating that this module is es-

sential for extracting global geometric features from boundary point clouds and forming an effect ive latent represen-

tation. When the number of encoder cross attention layers increases from 1 to 2, the model error further decreases. 

However, increasing it to 4 layers does not lead to additional improvement in prediction accuracy, suggesting that 

excess ive encoder cross attention layers may introduce redundant computation without providing further benefits.  In 

contrast, the number of encoder self -attention layers has a relatively smaller influence on the results of this example. 

When the encoder self -attention block is removed, the model can still maintain a relatively low error, indicating that 

cross attention is already able to capture the dominant geometric information in this  single -hole plate  case. Never-

theless, an appropriate number of self -atten tion layers can still promote information exchange among latent tokens and 

further improve prediction accuracy. On the other hand, the number of decoder cross attention layers has a more 

pronounced effect on training time, because the decoder needs to proc ess a larger number of query points. When the 

number of decoder cross attention layers increases, the training time increases noticeably, whereas the prediction 

accuracy does not improve accordingly. 

Table  4 analyzes the influence of the sampling and grouping parameters sN ,pN , and r on model performance. 

Overall, increasing sN and pN leads to a longer training time, which is consistent with the discussion on compu-

tational complexity in Appendix B. When these parameters are varied within a reasonable range, the 2

L error, 1

H

seminorm error, and energy norm error of MR -GVNO change only moderately, and the training time does not fluctuate 

significantly. This indicates that the model is not overly sensitive to the hyperparameters related to point cloud s am-

pling and grouping, and exhibits good stability. 

Specifically, sN controls the number of latent tokens used in the geometry encoder to represent the boundary ·24 ·

geometry. When sN is too small, the sampled poin ts may be insufficient to fully cover complex boundaries, thereby 

weakening the geometric representation capability of the model. When sN is further increased, the computational 

cost increases, but the prediction accuracy does not n ecessarily improve further. This suggests that a moderate value of sN

is already sufficient to provide an effective geometric representation in the present example. The parameter pN

determines the number of p oints contained in the local neighborhood of each sampled point. When pN varies within 

a relatively small range, its influence on the prediction results of MR -GVNO is limited. However, when pN becomes 

too lar ge, a decrease in prediction accuracy can be observed, indicating that an excessively large pN may introduce 

redundant points or overly broad local neighborhoods, thereby reducing the effectiveness of local geometric features. 

The s earch radius r controls the spatial scale of local grouping. When r is too small, the local neighborhood may 

fail to cover enough boundary points. When r is too large, the local group may mix excessive nonlocal information, 

reducing the discriminability of local geometric features. 

Table  3 Effect of the number of attention layers on prediction accuracy and training efficiency.                                              

> Enco der/ Decoder
> Cross -att. layers
> Encoder Self -att.
> layers
> Trainable
> parameters 2(%) L
> e1(%) H
> e(%) E
> eTraining (s/epoch)
> 0/4 2677,162 5.35 9.57 19.6 1.77
> 1/4 2827,498 2.48 5.71 13.9 1.82
> 2/4 0677,930 2.19 4.92 12.5 1.81
> 2/4 2977,834 2.09 4.73 11.9 1.82
> 4/4 21,278,506 2.30 5.18 13.0 1.84
> 2/4 41,277,738 2.82 6.14 14.9 1.82
> 1/8 21,027,946 3.1 46.60 15.5 2.51

Table  4 Influence of sampling and grouping  parameters on the prediction performance and training efficiency of MR -GVNO.                                                                  

> NsNpr2(%) L
> e1(%) H
> e(%) E
> eTraining (s/epoch)
> 818 0.2 2.6 26.23 15.2 1.74
> 16 40.2 1.75 4.51 11.6 1.77
> 16 90.2 1.89 4.6 12.0 1.76
> 16 18 0.05 1.98 5.34 13.8 1.76
> 16 18 0.1 1.77 4.66 12.0 1.82
> 16 18 0.2 2.09 4.73 11.9 1.82
> 16 18 0.3 3.2 06.47 14.9 1.80
> 16 64 0.2 3.1 56.6 115.3 1.73
> 64 18 0.2 2.33 5.2 712.8 1.93
> 128 18 0.2 2.19 5.48 13.6 2.18

Finally, we further investigate the influence of input point -cloud density and query  point discretization density on the 

prediction performance and training efficiency of MR -GVNO. Different values of gN and qN are considered, and 

the corresponding training time and predicted field distributions are summarized in  Table  5. It can be observed that 

when gN decreases from 320 to 125, the training efficiency of the model is significantly improved, indicating that 

reducing the density of input point clouds and query points can effectively decrease the computational cost. 

From the predi cted fields, MR -GVNO is able to recover the main spatial distribution characteristics of the transverse 

displacement w and the norm of the rotation field  for the  single -hole plate  under different point -cl oud densities. 

The predicted results remain generally consistent with the FEM reference solution in terms of the overall field pattern, 

demonstrating the robustness of the model to moderate point  cloud sparsification. However, as gN and qN are 

further reduced, both the geometric information along the boundary and the spatial discretization resolution of the 

response field become less sufficient. As a result, local geometric details and response gradients near  the hole boundary 

are more difficult to represent accurately, leading to a degradation in prediction accuracy. Overall, a moderate reduc-

tion in point -cloud density can significantly reduce the training cost with only a limited loss of accuracy, whereas 

exc essive sparsification may weaken the model’s ability to capture complex boundary features and local response 

characteristics. ·25 ·

Table  5 Influence of input point  cloud and query  point densities on the prediction performance and train ing efficiency of 

MR -GVNO.                         

> MR-GVNO Ground truth
> Ng125 160 200 250 320 /
> Nq[675, 1095] [1041, 1765] [1573, 2700] [2504, 4146] [3908, 6572] /
> Training
> (s/epoch) 0.948 1.03 1.14 1.36 1.82 /
> w

References 

[1]  K. Huang, J.  Zhang, Comparative modal analysis of beam -plate coupled models for isotropic active camber morphing wings, 

Aerospace Science and Technology (2026) 112449. 

[2]  X. Bai, R. Hu, S. Lu, W. Ma, X. Song, Dynamic characteristics and experimental investigation of weld -spot fixed rectangular 

plates, Ocean Engineering 355 (2026) 125142. 

[3]  L. Li, X. Wang, W. Jin, B. Lu, G. Xiao, J. Tang, Experimental study on the structural performance of UHPC shell composite 

beam in the negative moment zone, Engineering Structures 350 (2026 ) 122027. 

[4]  D. Du, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Li, W. Sun, Nonlinear dynamic modeling and analysis of bolted fiber -reinforced com-

posite plates, International Journal of Mechanical Sciences (2026) 111703. 

[5]  E. Samaniego, C. Anitescu, S. Goswami, V. M. Nguyen -Thanh, H. Guo, K. Hamdia, X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, An energy ap-

proach to the solution of partial differential equations in computational mechanics via machine learning: Concepts, implement a-

tion and applications, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Eng ineering 362 (2020) 112790. 

[6]  M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics -informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward 

and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physi cs 378 (2019) 686 –707. 

[7]  Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator for para-

metric partial differential equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 (2020). 

[8]  L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhan g, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal ap-

proximation theorem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218 –229. 

[9]  Z. Li, H. Zheng, N. Kovachki, D. Jin, H. Chen, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, A. Anand kumar, Physics -informed neural operator 

for learning partial differential equations, ACM/IMS Journal of Data Science 1 (3) (2024) 1 –27. 

[10]  J. H. Bastek, D. M. Kochmann, Physics -informed neural networks for shell structures, European Journal of  Mechan-

ics -A/Solids 97 (2023) 104849. 

[11]  W. Li, M. Z. Bazant, J. Zhu, A physics -guided neural network framework for elastic plates: Comparison of governing equa-

tions -based and energy -based approaches, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 383 ( 2021) 113933. 

[12]  X. Zhuang, H. Guo, N. Alajlan, H. Zhu, T. Rabczuk, Deep autoencoder based energy method for the bending, vibration, and 

buckling analysis of Kirchhoff plates with transfer learning, European Journal of Mechanics -A/Solids 87 (2021) 104225. 

[13]  S.  Liu, Y. Yu, T. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Liu, D. Meng, Architectures, variants, and performance of neural operators: A comparative 

review, Neurocomputing 648 (2025) 130518. 

[14]  N. Liu, S. Jafarzadeh, Y. Yu, Domain agnostic Fourier neural operators, in: Advances in Neu ral Information Processing Sys-

tems, vol. 36, 2023, pp. 47438 –47450. 

[15]  Z. Li, D. Z. Huang, B. Liu, A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator with learned deformations for PDEs on general geome-

tries, Journal of Machine Learning Research 24 (388) (2023) 1 –26. 

[16]  L. L u, X. Meng, S. Cai, Z. Mao, S. Goswami, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, A comprehensive and fair comparison of two 

neural operators with practical extensions based on FAIR data, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 393 

(2022) 114778. 

[17]  Z. Li, N . Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandkumar, Neural operator: Graph kernel 

network for partial differential equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03485 (2020). 

[18]  Z. Li, N. Kovachki, C. Choy, B. Li, J. Kossaifi, S. Otta, M . A. Nabian, M. Stadler, C. Hundt, K. Azizzadenesheli, A. 

Anandkumar, Geometry -informed neural operator for large -scale 3D PDEs, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-

tems, vol. 36, Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 35836 –35854. 

[19]  J. He, S. Koric , D. Abueidda, A. Najafi, I. Jasiuk, Geom -DeepONet: A point -cloud -based deep operator network for field 

predictions on 3D parameterized geometries, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 429 (2024) 117130. 

[20]  W. Zhong, H. Meidani, Physics -infor med geometry -aware neural operator, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 

Engineering 434 (2025) 117540. ·26 ·

[21]  Z. Hao, Z. Wang, H. Su, C. Ying, Y. Dong, S. Liu, Z. Cheng, J. Song, J. Zhu, GNOT: A general neural operator transformer 

for operator learning, in:  International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2023, pp. 12556 –12569. 

[22]  H. Wu, H. Luo, H. Wang, J. Wang, M. Long, Transolver: A fast Transformer solver for PDEs on general geometries, in: Pro-

ceedings of the 41st International Conference on  Machine Learning, PMLR 235, 2024, pp. 53681 –53705. 

[23]  Q. Liu, W. Zhong, H. Meidani, D. Abueidda, S. Koric, P. Geubelle, Geometry -informed neural operator transformer for par-

tial differential equations on arbitrary geometries, Computer Methods in Applied Mecha nics and Engineering 451 (2026) 118668. 

[24]  S. Wang, H. Wang, P. Perdikaris, Learning the solution operator of parametric partial differential equations with phys-

ics -informed DeepONets, Science Advances 7 (40) (2021) eabi8605. 

[25]  J. Y. Lee, S. Ko, Y. Hong, Finite  element operator network for solving elliptic -type parametric PDEs, SIAM Journal on Sci-

entific Computing 47 (2) (2025) C501 –C528. 

[26]  M. S. Eshaghi, C. Anitescu, M. Thombre, Y. Wang, X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, Variational physics -informed neural operator 

(VINO) f or solving partial differential equations, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 437 (2025) 117785. 

[27]  J. S. Hale, M. Brunetti, S. P. A. Bordas, C. Maurini, Simple and extensible plate and shell finite element models through au-

tomatic code gen eration tools, Computers & Structures 209 (2018) 163 –181. 

[28]  C. Zeng, Y. Zhang, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Wu, D. Z. Huang, Point cloud neural operator for parametric PDEs 

on complex and variable geometries, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics an d Engineering 443 (2025) 118022. 

[29]  S. Goswami, K. Kontolati, M. D. Shields, G. E. Karniadakis, Deep transfer operator learning for partial differential equation s

under conditional shift, Nature Machine Intelligence 4 (12) (2022) 1155 –1164. 

[30]  Y. Wang, Z. Hao, M . S. Eshaghi, C. Anitescu, X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, Y. Liu, Pretrain finite element method: A pretraining 

and warm -start framework for PDEs via physics -informed neural operators, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 214 

(2026) 106682. 

[31]  Y. Wang, X. L i, Z. Yan, S. Ma, J. Bai, B. Liu, X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, Y. Liu, A pretraining -finetuning computational frame-

work for material homogenization, International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 314 (2026) 111388. 

[32]  M. S. Eshaghi, C. Anitescu, N. Valizadeh, Y. Wang , X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, NOWS: Neural operator warm starts for acceler-

ating iterative solvers, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 458 (2026) 118989. 

[33]  Y. Wang, M. S. Eshaghi, X. Zhuang, T. Rabczuk, Y. Liu, Replay -based continual learning f or physics -informed neural opera-

tors, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.04832 (2026).