Title: CIG-Bench: A Comprehensive Survey and Benchmark for AI-Driven Subsurface Imaging Understanding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09094v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:17:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# CIG-Bench: A Comprehensive Survey and Benchmark for AI-Driven Subsurface Imaging Understanding 

# Yimin Dou 1, Xinming Wu 1,* , Hui Gao 1, Mingliang Liu 2, Tao Zhao 3, Zhi Zhong 4, Haibin Di 3,Min Jun Park 5, Robert G. Clapp 6, Zhixiang Guo 1, Long Han 1, and Sergey Fomel 7

> 1

School of Earth and Space Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 

> 2

School of Future Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, China 

> 3

Schlumberger (SLB), Houston, TX, USA 

> 4

China University of Geosciences (Wuhan), Wuhan, China 

> 5

X, the Moonshot Factory (Google X), Mountain View, CA, USA 

> 6

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

> 7

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 

> *

Corresponding author: xinmwu@ustc.edu.cn 

 Project page : https://douyimin.github.io/CIG-bench 

# ABSTRACT 

Subsurface imaging understanding bridges observed geophysical data and quantitative geological models, supporting appli-cations such as hydrocarbon exploration, CO 2 storage site assessment, and geohazard monitoring. Over the past decade, deep learning has substantially reshaped interpretation workflows. To take stock of this progress, we systematically analyze 652 publications from 2015 to 2025 and organize the field into four major tasks, namely structural interpretation, geobody identification, seismic facies analysis, and property estimation, reviewing how deep learning has reshaped each. Yet subsurface imaging interpretation remains fundamentally different from other AI-driven tasks, facing ambiguous signals, pronounced interpretive non-uniqueness, sparse semantics, unfixed target locations, and scarce reliable annotations. Building on the reviewed literature, we summarize three interrelated challenges that define its frontier: interpretation under complex geological conditions, cross-survey semantic generalization under low information density, and the absence of reliable benchmarks. We argue that addressing them will hinge on integrating human expertise, physical constraints, and geological priors into model training or inference, and on incorporating uncertainty quantification as an intrinsic model output. Together, these directions can mitigate the low information density, indirect observations, and strong interpretive non-uniqueness of subsurface imaging, and improve the reliability and practical value of interpretation under complex geological conditions. Among these challenges, the lack of unified benchmarks has been particularly consequential, making fair method comparison difficult, hindering repro-ducibility, and fragmenting community efforts. We therefore propose a community benchmark covering representative tasks, including fault segmentation, relative geologic time estimation, geobody segmentation, and property modeling. It integrates unified evaluation protocols, pretrained models, and datasets that combine synthetic data for quantitative evaluation with real surveys for qualitative assessment. By coupling a decade-spanning review with an evolving benchmark, this work offers a timely reference for the field and a reproducible, extensible foundation to accelerate future research and deployment. 

# Contents 

1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.1 AI for Geophysics Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3 1.2 Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 1.3 Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 

2 Literature Collection and Corpus Curation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 CIG-Bench Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 Task-wise Review and Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

4.1 Benchmark design and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 

> arXiv:2606.09094v1 [physics.geo-ph] 8 Jun 2026

4.2 Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.3 Geobody . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 4.4 Facies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 4.5 Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

5 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 6 Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

# 1 Introduction 

Figure 1. A structured overview of AI for geophysics-based subsurface imaging understanding. The framework identifies two categories of core challenges: inherent imaging limitations (blurriness, ambiguity, and nonlinear mapping) and data characteristics (massive scale, heterogeneity, and multi-scale features). Against these challenges, AI-driven solutions including deep learning-based perception, probabilistic modeling, physics-informed learned mapping, efficient computing, multimodal fusion, and scale-aware learning are shown to reshape existing research paradigms. The framework further highlights three open challenges for future research: interpretation under complex geological conditions, cross-survey semantic generalization, and benchmark dataset construction. Human understanding of the Earth’s interior began with indirect observations at the surface and information obtained through drilling. Yet the composition, structural characteristics, and dynamic processes of the deep subsurface have long remained central unresolved questions in Earth science. Unlike astronomical observations, which permit direct visualization of distant galaxies, probing the Earth’s interior faces a fundamental limitation: geological structures and physical properties at depths of hundreds to thousands of meters cannot be directly observed. This intrinsic invisibility makes subsurface imaging an indispensable tool for revealing the hidden architecture and processes of the Earth (Mousavi and Beroza, 2022; Yu and Ma, 2021; Bergen et al., 2019). However, the technologies associated with subsurface imaging are inherently indirect and correspond to a fundamentally ill-posed inverse problem (Grana, 2016). They aim to infer highly complex underground structures using only limited surface observations acquired through physical measurement systems. These observations are constrained by limited aperture, which restricts the range of illumination and observation; limited frequency bandwidth, which imposes resolution limits through wavelength; and noise contamination, which reduces signal fidelity. As a consequence of these physical constraints, seismic imaging inevitably exhibits restricted resolution, artifacts introduced by imperfect illumination and modeling, and significant non-uniqueness. These inherent deficiencies make the reliable reconstruction of the Earth’s interior both challenging and uncertain. 

> 2/45

A systematic review of subsurface interpretation literature published between 2015 and 2025 reveals that machine learning and artificial intelligence methods are steadily becoming the dominant research paradigm, with their proportion in the literature increasing markedly each year (Bergen et al., 2019; Yu and Ma, 2021; Mousavi and Beroza, 2022; Sun et al., 2022). This trend is driven primarily by two factors. First, machine learning has already transformed interpretation workflows in related domains such as medical image analysis and remote sensing, and its mature methodologies and toolchains provide a valuable reference for subsurface interpretation (Wang et al., 2018; Khosro Anjom et al., 2024). Second, machine learning has demonstrated substantial performance gains in several key tasks within subsurface interpretation, including fault detection (Wu et al., 2019a; Xiong et al., 2018), horizon picking (Wu et al., 2019b; Geng et al., 2020), seismic facies classification (Alaudah et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2018), and impedance inversion (Yang and Ma, 2019; Das et al., 2019), offering empirical evidence that it represents a practical and promising technical pathway for future development. Building upon machine learning, intelligent methods represented by deep learning offer significant advantages over traditional subsurface imaging and conventional machine learning approaches (Yu and Ma, 2021; Mousavi et al., 2024). First, deep networks enable end-to-end feature learning, automatically extracting multi-level representations from raw seismic data that range from textures to semantic patterns; convolutional and self-attention based modules function as task-adaptive "seismic attributes", thereby reducing reliance on hand-crafted feature design. Second, deep learning provides strong nonlinear mapping capability, allowing the approximation of high-dimensional functional relationships that arise from coupled physical processes, and capturing implicit patterns that are difficult for linear or weakly nonlinear methods to represent (Biswas et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020). Third, once trained, deep models achieve highly efficient parallel inference on GPUs or TPUs, enabling large-scale real-time or near-real-time interpretation; for tasks such as fault detection, the computational efficiency can exceed that of traditional workflows by several orders of magnitude. Fourth, deep models offer output consistency, producing stable results for identical inputs, which reduces interpreter subjectivity and facilitates multi-temporal monitoring and regional-scale comparative analysis. Fifth, these models possess continual learning capability, allowing iterative updates and performance improvement through incremental data accumulation, thereby creating a positive feedback cycle between data growth and model capability (Cunha et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2021). These advantages rely on the foundation of large-scale models and high-quality datasets (Alaudah et al., 2019; Chai et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2019a). However, compared with data modalities in remote sensing or medical imaging, subsurface seismic data exhibit greater complexity and variability in terms of acquisition geometry, illumination, noise, and geological diversity (Wu et al., 2023; Khosro Anjom et al., 2024). Consequently, although research advances in artificial intelligence have been considerable, only fault interpretation has produced solutions that approach scalable and stable deployment in engineering practice, supported by a rapidly growing ecosystem of 3D fault detection networks and evaluation studies (Wu et al., 2019a,c; An et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a). For most other essential subsurface interpretation tasks, mature AI-based systems that support large-scale operational use have yet to be established. As the bridge linking seismic information with geological understanding, subsurface imaging and interpretation still face a wide range of systemic challenges. The field of subsurface imaging understanding confronts challenges from two fundamental dimensions, as illustrated in Figure 1. The first stems from inherent limitations of imaging methods: seismic data are inherently blurry due to limited bandwidth and aperture, ambiguous due to strong non-uniqueness where identical observations may correspond to multiple geological scenarios, and opaque due to the nonlinear complex mapping between surface measurements and subsurface properties. The second dimension arises from data characteristics, including the massive scale of terabyte-level 3D surveys, heterogeneity introduced by multi-source noisy acquisition, and multi-scale complexity where features ranging from meter-scale fractures to kilometer-scale salt bodies must be simultaneously handled. In response to these challenges, AI has driven a series of technical advances over the past decade, with augmented perception addressing blurriness, probabilistic modeling tackling ambiguity, learned mapping resolving opacity, efficient computing managing massive scale, smart fusion handling heterogeneity, and scale-aware learning capturing multi-scale structures. Together, these approaches represent a paradigm shift from fragmented task-specific models toward unified, transferable frameworks. Despite this progress, three open challenges persist and define the frontier of current research: the difficulty of interpreting complex geological conditions, cross-survey semantic generalization bottlenecks arising from low information density, and the lack of reliable benchmark datasets, the last of which directly motivates the construction of CIG-Bench as a community-maintained evaluation platform. 

1.1 AI for Geophysics Challenges 

Compared with natural images and medical images, subsurface imaging data present substantially greater challenges for machine learning tasks. As illustrated in Figure 2, natural images benefit from rich semantic information, clear contours and boundaries, and abundant annotated data, while medical images enjoy relatively well-defined 

> 3/45

Figure 2. Adapted from Dou et al. (2025). (a, b) A comparison of task difficulty between orange detection in natural images and subsurface interpretation. Natural images offer rich visual cues, whereas subsurface targets must be inferred from weak and ambiguous seismic responses. (c) A comparison of natural, medical, and subsurface imaging. In contrast to natural and medical images, subsurface imaging has sparse semantics, diverse structures, low image quality, and difficult annotation, making interpretation and generalization substantially more challenging. target boundaries owing to fixed anatomical positions and standardized imaging conditions. Subsurface imaging data, by contrast, are characterized by scarce semantic information, diverse structural morphologies, unfixed target locations, low imaging quality, and considerable labeling difficulty. The radar chart further reveals that subsurface imaging lags far behind the other two modalities in terms of data abundance, boundary clarity, and semantic integrity—intrinsic properties that collectively determine the high difficulty of intelligent interpretation tasks. These challenges can be understood from three interrelated perspectives: interpretation difficulties under complex geological conditions, bottlenecks in low information density and cross-survey semantic generalization, and inherent limitations in benchmark dataset construction. 

> 1.1.1 Interpretation Difficulties under Complex Geological Conditions

Interpretation challenges associated with complex geological settings arise from multiple sources (Yu and Ma, 2021; Mousavi and Beroza, 2022). At the structural system level, complexity is driven by multi-phase tectonic overprinting. En echelon, imbricated, and flower like fault systems exhibit intricate geometric relationships, and small displacement faults are easily missed due to their weak seismic expression. In the shallow subsurface, scattering and absorption within fractured zones combined with velocity heterogeneity lead to energy shadow zones and traveltime distortions in underlying layers (Feng et al., 2021a; An et al., 2021). In the deep subsurface, resolution loss causes faults to appear blurred, discontinuous, or misaligned, which complicates the reconstruction of continuous structural features (Li et al., 2024a; Dou et al., 2024a). Special tectonic environments introduce additional difficulties (Adler et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021). Subduction zone megathrusts exhibit sharp velocity contrasts and strong anisotropy, which combined with multiple wave 

> 4/45

interference make interface tracking particularly challenging. Strike slip fault zones contain abrupt lateral velocity changes that induce striped artifacts and false anomalies, thereby obscuring true structures. Fold–unconformity systems display high uncertainty in stratigraphic relationships (Bi et al., 2021; Geng et al., 2020). Intense deformation produces abrupt variations in dip and highly dispersed reflection patterns, while truncation and wedge out at unconformities complicate sequence correlation. Strong velocity anomaly bodies such as salt bodies and igneous intrusions further amplify interpretational uncertainty (Waldeland et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019; Wu, 2016). Their wavefield effects generate shadow zones, scattering induced "smile" artifacts, and false fault responses, which increase ambiguity in fault connectivity and displacement estimation and weaken the reliability of three-dimensional interpretation (Wang et al., 2015a; Alfarhan et al., 2022). 

> 1.1.2 Low Information Density and Cross-Survey Semantic Generalization Bottlenecks

The difficulty of cross-survey generalization in seismic interpretation arises from three systemic levels. At the data level, heterogeneity in geological settings leads to large variations in geometry, physical contrast, and spatial scale of target bodies (Cunha et al., 2020; Nasim et al., 2022). Variations in acquisition parameters cause discrepancies in frequency content, signal-to-noise ratio, and azimuthal anisotropy. Non-standardized processing workflows reshape statistical characteristics and texture patterns. At the physical level, the indirect and ill-posed nature of seismic imaging inherently produces low information density and weak semantic content. At the interpretation level, these characteristics lead to severe non-uniqueness; identical seismic responses may correspond to multiple geological scenarios, which is particularly critical in seismic facies analysis and property inversion (Grana et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2021a; Qian et al., 2018). Limitations of purely data-driven models exacerbate this challenge (Khosro Anjom et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2023). Without the integration of physical constraints or geological priors, such models tend to overfit distributional characteristics of the training domain and exhibit semantic drift when applied to new surveys. Viewed from the perspective of imaging characteristics, seismic data exhibit a "dual disadvantage" (Dou et al., 2025). Their information density is lower than that of natural images, which means that informative features are much sparser. Their structural complexity is higher than that of medical images, which benefit from relatively fixed imaging geometries and anatomical priors, whereas geological structures show greater uncertainty and variability in spatial morphology, scale hierarchy, and structural combinations. The combination of information sparsity and structural complexity imposes a dual challenge for the generalization capability and geological consistency of intelligent interpretation models. Empirical evidence shows that current methods still suffer from significant limitations in cross-survey generalization. Most models require survey-specific fine tuning to achieve acceptable accuracy in new areas. Only in relatively stable scenarios, such as shallow fault detection, do models exhibit some plug and play capability. A genuinely universal modeling paradigm for subsurface interpretation has not yet been established (Sheng et al., 2025; Dou et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2026). 

> 1.1.3 Difficulties in Benchmark Dataset Construction

Data represent a fundamental resource for artificial intelligence and form the essential infrastructure for advancing subsurface imaging and interpretation (Bergen et al., 2019; Alaudah et al., 2019). A systematic benchmark unifies task definitions, labeling standards, and evaluation protocols, and provides a reproducible experimental environment that supports fair performance comparison and methodological iteration. Such a benchmark also offers a reliable foundation for model training, accelerates model development, reduces redundant research cost, and enables standardized collaboration across institutions. Two technical pathways have been explored, yet both face intrinsic limitations. The path based on manual annotation of real seismic data is constrained by the inherent non-uniqueness, ambiguity, and low semantic content of seismic reflections. Even experienced interpreters struggle to achieve high consistency when working on the same seismic volume (Wu et al., 2019b; Zhang et al., 2021a). Current workflows rely mainly on two-dimensional section based labeling, which cannot ensure geometric continuity or topological consistency across slices (Dou et al., 2022a,b). Large scale three-dimensional labeling is therefore constrained by both cost and feasibility. The synthetic data generation path is limited by the extreme complexity and diversity of geological structures and depositional processes (Wu et al., 2019a). Existing synthetic modeling schemes cannot fully cover the combinatorial space of structural styles, sedimentary patterns, imaging artifacts, and noise conditions present in real surveys. This leads to a synthetic to real gap, which reduces transferability and weakens generalization performance of models trained purely on synthetic data. In recent years, several large-scale benchmark datasets have been released to address this challenge, including cigFacies for seismic facies classification (Gao et al., 2025) and cigChannel for 3D channel segmentation (Wang et al., 2025), which provide standardized training and evaluation resources for the 

> 5/45

community. 

1.2 Tasks 

Subsurface imaging interpretation is a complex problem that targets multiple tasks and requires the joint incorporation of diverse geological and physical constraints. Considering the heterogeneity of interpretation objects and task objectives, this review categorizes subsurface interpretation into four major classes: structural interpretation, geobody interpretation, seismic facies interpretation, and property interpretation. Each class corresponds to specific geological meanings and exhibits distinct characteristics in terms of technical pathways and application scenarios. The definitions adopted in this paper are intended only for the narrow context of subsurface interpretation and should not be regarded as general definitions of these concepts in broader settings. 

Structural interpretation: Structural interpretation refers to the identification, characterization, and rep-resentation of subsurface geological structural elements. It encompasses, but is not limited to, the interpretation of key structural interfaces such as faults, horizons, and unconformities, and also includes related tasks such as constructing structural frameworks, estimating relative geologic time (RGT), and geological structural modeling. 

Geobody interpretation: Geobody interpretation aims to identify, characterize, and segment three-dimensional entities in the subsurface that exhibit relatively independent geometries and distinct geological origins. It covers typical geobody types such as igneous intrusions and traps, including but not limited to salt bodies, karst caves, and channels. 

Seismic facies interpretation: Seismic facies refers to a set of seismic reflection units exhibiting similar reflection characteristics, such as amplitude, frequency, continuity, waveform, and stratification patterns, and it typically reflects specific depositional environments or geological processes. At present, seismic facies interpretation is mainly conducted under two viewing paradigms: sectional views (also referred to as profile-based views, performed on inline/crossline sections) and horizon-based views (also referred to as the stratal perspective, performed along horizon-aligned or stratigraphically constrained slices). 

Property interpretation: Here, "properties" denote subsurface geological or geophysical parameters — including elastic attributes such as impedance and velocity, and petrophysical quantities such as porosity and density — that are inferred from seismic data and calibrated through well logs. The goal of property interpretation is to establish generalizable mappings between seismic responses and physical parameters, enabling the inversion, estimation, and modeling of property volumes. 

1.3 Contribution 

From a macro perspective, Bergen et al. systematically discuss the applications of machine learning in solid Earth sciences and emphasize the critical role of open science principles and benchmark datasets in sustaining long-term disciplinary development (Bergen et al., 2019). Mousavi and Beroza focus on the use of deep learning across subfields of seismology, covering earthquake signal detection, denoising, and image-based interpretation, among other topics (Mousavi and Beroza, 2022). Yu and Ma provide a systematic overview of recent advances and future trends of deep learning in geophysics, with coverage that spans exploration geophysics, seismology, and atmospheric sciences. These reviews offer researchers a robust macroscopic perspective and a clear conceptual framework, but they primarily target the broader Earth science community (Yu and Ma, 2021). Their discussions remain relatively shallow with respect to specific tasks in subsurface imaging and interpretation, and therefore provide limited detailed and operational guidance for method selection and technical implementation on particular interpretation problems. For specific interpretation tasks in subsurface imaging, several high-quality task-oriented reviews are already available. An et al. concentrate on fault interpretation and provide a detailed synthesis of deep-learning model architectures, datasets, and evaluation metrics; their work is one of the most systematic and comprehensive reviews currently available for fault detection (An et al., 2023). Xu et al. review the development of seismic facies analysis from a geological perspective and highlight the importance of integrated geological and geophysical constraints (Xu and Haq, 2022). Islam et al. focus on the identification of salt bodies and summarize deep-learning-based salt segmentation methods together with related public datasets (Islam and Wali, 2024). Li et al. present a comprehensive review of the applications of fully connected networks, convolutional networks, recurrent networks, and generative networks in seismic inversion (Li et al., 2023a), while Wang et al. further summarize recent advances of deep neural networks in velocity modeling and impedance inversion (Wang et al., 2023a). Grana et al. concentrate on probabilistic inversion methods and emphasize the central role of uncertainty quantification in reservoir characterization (Grana et al., 2022). Overall, these single-task reviews have reached a high level of technical depth within their respective domains. However, they are often restricted to a particular class of geological bodies or a single type of structure and have not yet examined, from an integrated perspective, the unified framework, benchmark construction, and coupled evolution of the entire subsurface interpretation task system in the era of deep learning and large models. 

> 6/45

In the domain of exploration geophysics and subsurface imaging, a number of topic specific reviews have also been published. Mousavi et al. systematically summarize the use of deep neural networks throughout the seismic exploration workflow, including data acquisition, preprocessing, migration imaging, and interpretation, thereby providing a clear technical roadmap for constructing an end-to-end intelligent seismic exploration workflow (Mousavi et al., 2024). Khosro Anjom et al. examine the current status and limitations of machine learning in seismic exploration from a more critical standpoint, construct a systematic literature database, and perform quantitative analyses of research hotspots and their temporal evolution (Khosro Anjom et al., 2024). Wu et al. summarize three major strategies for incorporating domain knowledge into deep neural networks, namely the use of geological and geophysical forward modeling to generate synthetic training data, the explicit embedding of physical operators and preconditioners into network architectures, and the incorporation of mechanical and geological constraints into loss functions, with the goal of achieving an organic integration of data-driven and physics-driven paradigms (Wu et al., 2023). Lin and Zhong et al. systematically review the application of machine learning to the interpretation of faults, salt bodies, horizons, channels, and karst systems, and they release corresponding annotated datasets, which provide an important foundation for subsequent model evaluation and method comparison (Lin et al., 2024). Taken together, these studies promote the dissemination and standardization of machine learning in seismic exploration from the perspectives of exploration workflow, methodology, and application case studies. Nevertheless, they have not yet developed a systematic discussion that uses the subsurface imaging interpretation task system as the central object. The internal connections among sub tasks such as structural interpretation, geobody delineation, seismic facies analysis, and property interpretation, as well as a unified evaluation framework for these tasks, remain relatively under explored. A fully developed, task oriented solution framework and a reproducible benchmark system dedicated to subsurface interpretation have also yet to emerge. The main contributions of this review are as follows. 

• A decade-spanning survey. We compile and analyze 652 publications (2015–2025) across four interpretation tasks—structural interpretation, geobody identification, seismic facies analysis, and property estimation. By tracing their internal connections and evolution, we assess how deep learning and AI have reshaped each task, summarize the strengths and limitations of current methods, and distill task-specific challenges and future directions. 

• A standardized benchmark dataset. We release the CIG-Bench dataset, providing synthetic seismic volumes with unified task definitions, annotation protocols, and data splits for fault segmentation, relative geologic time estimation, geobody segmentation (channels and karst), and property modeling. The samples span diverse, geologically realistic settings—varied fault types, complex folds and unconformities, multi-scale channel and karst systems, and paired impedance/velocity volumes—enabling controlled quantitative evaluation across tasks. 

• An open-source benchmark library. We provide pretrained baselines together with one-click inference and deployment APIs, allowing researchers to run models on new surveys and reproduce all reported results with minimal setup. Evaluated under a unified protocol, the baselines deliver consistent improvements over widely used open-source counterparts and are intended as transparent, reproducible reference points for fair comparison. CIG-Bench is maintained as an extensible benchmark, with planned model updates, community-contributed baselines, and coverage of additional tasks. 

# 2 Literature Collection and Corpus Curation 

The paper corpus was collected and curated as follows. We first built a literature retrieval and metadata acquisition pipeline based on Crossref. Using a set of keywords related to subsurface imaging and interpretation, we implemented scripts to automatically search and aggregate candidate papers published between 2015 and 2025, extracting basic information such as DOIs, titles, authors, abstracts, venues, and citation counts. The full keyword list (organised by the four task categories), the query date, and the post-retrieval filtering rules used to remove duplicates and clearly off-topic entries are released together with CIG-Bench so that the full retrieval-to-curation pipeline can be reproduced or extended by the community. Accordingly, the metadata and citation links used in this study were obtained from the Crossref database. This implies that the statistics may exhibit temporal lag, may be biased against venues with limited Crossref coverage (notably non-DOI SEG expanded abstracts and some regional journals), and some entries may be missing due to incomplete coverage or delayed updates; the citation-network view in Figure 3 should 

> 7/45

Figure 3. Citation-network view of the curated corpus. From the 652 papers compiled in this work, panel (a) shows the paper-level citation network with cross-category linkages and a directional citation flow legend that aggregates inter-cluster citations under the manual category labels assigned during curation. Panels (b–f) summarise within-corpus directed citations between categories: (b,c) in-degree and out-degree counts per category; (d) the citation impact matrix; (e) cross-category citation flows after excluding within-domain citations, decomposed into cross-cite-out and cross-cite-in components; (f) the within-domain share of each category. The figure is provided as a quantitative overview of the curated corpus and is referenced where relevant in subsequent task discussions. therefore be read as an approximate, in-corpus snapshot of inter-task knowledge flow rather than a universe-level measurement. On this basis, we initially partitioned the candidate papers into four major categories via keyword scanning. We then manually verified the automatic assignments paper by paper, with particular attention to misclassifications caused by ambiguous category boundaries, keyword polysemy, or insufficient abstract information. Labels were corrected and supplemented accordingly, improving classification accuracy and consistency while maintaining broad coverage. Because the four categories are conceptually overlapping—for example, a study that uses fault constraints to support impedance inversion is naturally relevant to both Structure and Property—a small fraction of papers were assigned to more than one category when their primary contributions clearly spanned multiple tasks. Consequently, the sum of category-wise paper counts reported in subsequent sections slightly exceeds the size of the deduplicated corpus ( 652 ). Within this corpus, 478 papers explicitly adopt machine-learning or deep-learning methodologies, and these constitute the subset used for the temporal and methodological statistics in Figure 4. The resulting corpus retains the scalability and reproducibility of automated retrieval, while reducing noise and systematic bias through human review, thereby providing a reliable foundation for subsequent survey analysis and citation relationship studies. We release the resulting metadata table together with CIG-Bench to facilitate community reproduction of the retrieval and categorization process, and to enable further extensions and analyses. Finally, because the automatically retrieved candidate set is large, citations in the main text are limited to the most relevant and representative works 

> 8/45

Figure 4. Machine learning in subsurface imaging interpretation (2015–2025). (a) Stacked area chart of 478 ML papers across four targets (Structure, Geobody, Facies, Property), showing approximately tenfold growth from 2015 to a peak in 2023, with Property and Structure as leading categories. (b) Sankey diagram linking interpretation targets to tasks, methods, and publication years, revealing a decisive shift from traditional ML and non-ML approaches toward deep learning dominance post-2019. for the narrative of this review. Papers not cited should not be interpreted as lacking research value, but rather reflect space constraints and organizational choices inherent to survey writing. 

# 3 CIG-Bench Dataset 

CIG-Bench provides a comprehensive collection of synthetic seismic volumes with paired labels spanning multiple geological structures and geobodies, including faults, stratigraphic sequences (represented as relative geologic time), velocity and acoustic impedance, fluvial channels, and karst cave systems. Each synthetic seismic volume has a dimension of 512 × 1024 × 512 samples along the depth, inline, and crossline directions, respectively, with a vertical sampling interval of 5 m (covering a depth range of approximately 0–2.56 km ) and a lateral grid spacing of 25 m×25 m(corresponding to a surface survey area of approximately 25 .6 × 12 .8 km 2, or roughly 328 km 2). Representative examples of these data and their corresponding labels are illustrated in Figure 5. As illustrated in Figure 5, rows (a) and (b) present seismic data samples annotated with fault and stratigraphic labels (Wu et al., 2020a). Each sample set provides the raw seismic amplitude volume, a fault label volume encompassing diverse fracture styles, and a relative geologic time volume delineating the continuous stratigraphic framework. The fault labels cover representative structural styles including normal faults, reverse faults, multi-phase intersecting faults, and complex fracture assemblages, while the stratigraphic labels characterize structural features such as folds, unconformities, tilted strata, and complex depositional interfaces. Rows (c) and (d) present seismic data samples annotated with geobody labels, comprising typical reservoir geobodies such as channels (Wang et al., 2025) and karst caves (Wu et al., 2020b), depicting targets of varying scales, morphologies, and spatial distributions within seismic responses that closely approximate realistic depositional settings. All samples are accompanied by ground-truth labels of acoustic impedance and velocity, enabling the construction of quantitative petrophysical models consistent with the simulated geological background, thereby supporting unified benchmarking of multiple tasks—including structural interpretation, geobody identification, relative geologic time estimation, and reservoir property inversion—under controlled and geologically reasonable conditions. 

# 4 Task-wise Review and Benchmark 

This chapter provides a systematic review of the past decade of machine learning and AI advances across four subsurface imaging and interpretation tasks: Structure, Geobody, Facies, and Property. Figure 4(a) summarizes publication trends and task composition for studies from 2015 to 2024. Overall, the early stage (2015 to 2017) featured relatively few publications and slow growth. Since 2018, the field entered a rapid expansion phase and remained at a high level after 2019, reaching a local peak in 2023, followed by a modest decline in 2024. Among the 478 machine-learning-based publications used for this temporal analysis 1, Property and Structure dominate 

> 1The full corpus comprises 652 deduplicated papers; the 478 subset reported here is the strict machine-learning/deep-learning subset on which the temporal and methodological statistics in Figure 4 are computed. The per-category paper counts in the citation-network
> 9/45

Figure 5. Representative samples from the CIG-Bench synthetic dataset. Rows (a) and (b) show seismic samples with structural annotations, including raw seismic amplitude volumes, fault labels with diverse fault styles, relative geologic time volumes, and stratigraphic surfaces describing the continuous depositional framework. Rows (c) and (d) show seismic samples with geobody annotations, including channel systems and karst cave systems with different scales, geometries, and spatial distributions. All samples are additionally paired with ground-truth acoustic impedance and velocity volumes (not shown here for compactness) to support reservoir property modelling. Volume dimensions and sampling are as specified in Section 3. 

> view of Figure 3 (Structure 196, Geobody 72, Facies 122, Property 268) include some papers assigned to multiple categories and therefore

10/45 the literature, accounting for approximately 35.8% and 31.6%, respectively, followed by Facies at about 21.5% and Geobody at about 10.7%. This distribution reflects shared priorities in both research and practice. Property modeling typically serves high value applications such as reservoir characterization and quantitative prediction, generating direct benefits for reserve evaluation, development plan optimization, and risk control. It has therefore remained the most engineering driven and economically impactful direction, leading to the largest publication volume. Structure, in contrast, focuses on recovering fault systems and stratigraphic frameworks. Its outputs provide essential geometric constraints for horizon tracking, geobody boundary delineation, facies belt mapping, and the spatial consistency of property modeling, and often determine the upper bound of reliability for subsequent interpretation and modeling. It is thus a foundational component across multiple subsurface tasks and ranks second in publication volume. By comparison, Facies and Geobody more often function as intermediate representations that bridge seismic responses and geological semantics. They are typically used within an established structural framework to support depositional unit delineation, facies zoning, and object based characterization, and they provide priors for property modeling, including lithologic assemblages, depositional environments, and reservoir body geometries. In many industrial workflows, they may also appear as derived products obtained after property inversion and reservoir prediction, for example through thresholding, clustering, or connectivity analysis. Because label definitions for these tasks are more subjective and scale dependent, and are strongly influenced by local geological context, data quality, and imaging resolution, high-quality 3D annotation is costly and cross-survey generalization is difficult. These factors contribute to their comparatively smaller research scale and publication volume. Moreover, flow analysis in Figure 4(b) indicates that deep learning became dominant rapidly after 2018 to 2019, while the share of traditional machine learning continued to shrink, although it remains present in certain classification and feature-engineering-oriented studies. Overall, Figure 4(b) highlights a decade-long transition in subsurface interpretation from limited exploratory efforts to large-scale growth, accompanied by a structural methodological shift from traditional machine learning to deep-learning-dominated approaches. This transition provides the foundation for subsequent developments toward cross-survey generalization, stronger global consistency constraints, and more interactive interpretation workflows. 

4.1 Benchmark design and scope 

Before turning to the task-wise reviews and CIG-Bench baselines, we clarify two design choices that govern how the benchmark results below should be read. Although cross-survey generalization is the central open problem emphasized throughout this review, the quantitative results in the following subsections are computed on synthetic data. This is a deliberate compromise: subsurface interpretation has no objective, absolutely correct ground truth (Section 1.1), and densely annotated multi-survey field data essentially do not exist, so synthetic data are currently the only source that simultaneously provides exact voxel-level labels and controlled variation in structure, noise, and imaging conditions—at the known cost of the synthetic-to-real gap. Accordingly, the synthetic metrics reported in Section 4.5.8 should be read as a controlled measure of the methodological upper bound and of the relative ranking among methods on held-out data from the training distribution, rather than as a direct estimate of field performance; generalization to real surveys is supported indirectly through the qualitative field results shown task by task below, including the CIG-Bench-Channel results in Section 4.3.6 that still exhibit missed detections and false-positive responses. Establishing densely annotated multi-survey field benchmarks remains an important direction for future work. For the same reason, the baselines released here are deliberately lightweight and single-task. A benchmark must serve as a transparent and controllable reference point so that newly proposed methods can be compared under identical conditions. Compact, fully disclosed baselines fulfil this role: their architecture, hyperparameters, and training pipeline are fixed and reproducible, so any observed performance difference can be attributed to the candidate method rather than to opaque engineering or undisclosed implementation choices. The benchmark therefore measures whether a method improves under controlled, transparent conditions, providing a standardized measuring stick against which future work—of any scale or paradigm—can be evaluated. 

4.2 Structure 

As shown in Figure 6, progress in structural interpretation over the past decade can be summarized into five major phases, tracing an evolution from conventional seismic attribute analysis to deep learning and, more recently, to domain foundation models. The figure highlights the key technical transitions, representative keywords, and milestone events of each phase; we discuss them in turn in the following subsections. Whether the most recent 

> sum to slightly more than 652.
> 11/45

Figure 6. The figure summarizes the technological evolution and paradigm shifts in structural interpretation over the past decade, driven by advances in machine learning and deep learning. Using stage-specific keywords and representative milestones, it delineates the research focus of each phase and its central transitions. move toward domain foundation models develops into a lasting paradigm shift, rather than a transfer of methods successful in other fields, still awaits longer-term validation in practical fault interpretation. 

> 4.2.1 2015–2016: Seismic-attribute-driven interpretation

During 2015–2016, fault and horizon interpretation largely followed the classical paradigm of geometric modelling with attribute enhancement, where algorithms primarily improved visualisation and picking efficiency under interpreter control. For faults, one line of work combined minimum/maximum autocorrelation factors with fuzzy classification to separate ’faulted’ from ’non-faulted’ zones in a high-dimensional attribute space (Shakiba et al., 2015). Another line focused on isolating diffraction energy: time-slice singular spectrum analysis (TSSSA) decomposed seismic amplitudes into wavefield components and extracted diffraction features to highlight fractures and faults (Rekapalli et al., 2016). Visual-saliency methods also appeared, fusing saliency maps derived from coherence, curvature, dip, and gradient attributes to localise faults via bottom-up attention mechanisms (Lawal et al., 2016). In practice, coherence, variance, and ant-tracking volumes remained widely used in industry. Geomechanical and kinematic modelling was increasingly employed to reduce structural uncertainty. Maerten and Maerten (2015) introduced geomechanically based restoration to constrain interpretations of poorly imaged horizons and faults, using stress-field consistency as an external validation. Godefroy et al. (2016) developed a numerical kinematic model that parameterises slip on fault surfaces and ductile deformation of surrounding strata, enabling forward simulation and back-analysis of fault-adjacent geometries. For horizons, automated extraction methods advanced through PDE-based formulations. Wang et al. (2015b) proposed 3D horizon extraction by solving an inhomogeneous anisotropic Poisson equation with horizon-patch constraints to preserve reflection continuity in noisy regions and near unconformities. Herron (2015) catalogued common failure modes in horizon autopicking and provided practical quality-control guidance. Global horizon tracking was also coupled with chronostratigraphic modelling: Labrunye and Carn (2015) used relative geologic time modelling to merge extracted horizon patches into a space–time stratigraphic framework for subsequent reservoir characterisation. Overall, structural interpretation in this stage remained interpreter-guided and attribute-centric, relying on refined attributes, geometric or geomechanical constraints, and improved tracking rather than data-driven feature learning, foreshadowing the deep-learning transition that followed. 

> 4.2.2 2017–2018: Early adoption of machine learning

During 2017–2018, statistical machine learning and early deep learning began to systematically enter fault and horizon interpretation, while attribute-based methods continued to advance in parallel (Araya-Polo et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2018). A first line of work refined geometric attributes. Directional structure-tensor coherence exploited full orientation information to better highlight faults and channels than eigenvalue-based coherence (Wu, 2017). Flexure analysis captured subtle curvature anomalies relevant to fault and fracture characterisation (Di and Gao, 2017a). Multi-attribute fusion using PCA produced composite fault attributes for small-displacement fault detection (Jahan et al., 2017), and fault-attribute volumes were analysed for their implications on fault geometry such as length, height, and segmentation (Libak et al., 2017). 

> 12/45

A second line explicitly posed fault detection as supervised classification. Guitton et al. (2017) trained statistical models on labelled samples to predict 3D fault-probability volumes, among the earliest systematic machine-learning applications to fault imaging. Araya-Polo et al. (2017) further demonstrated automated fault detection directly from raw seismic data, using deep learning to bypass conventional processing and attribute extraction. From 2018 onward, CNN-based fault recognition expanded rapidly (Xiong et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018; Di et al., 2018a). These studies treated 2D sections or 3D patches as images, enabling networks to learn fault textures and amplitude patterns and output pixel-level masks or probability volumes. Xiong et al. (2018) showed that CNNs can match or exceed attribute-based performance, while GAN-based augmentation was introduced to enrich training data (Lu et al., 2018). Subsequent workflows combined deep models with post-processing to enable end-to-end fault detection (Zhao and Mukhopadhyay, 2018; Guo et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018). For horizons, multi-attribute and statistical strategies were incorporated into autopicking. Lou and Zhang (2018) fused phase, amplitude, and dip attributes to improve picking in complex settings, and hybrid frameworks combined texture segmentation, unsupervised clustering, and dynamic time warping for joint facies classification and horizon tracking (Bugge et al., 2018). However, deep-learning-based horizon interpretation remained comparatively limited. Overall, this period marked a transition from attribute engineering with shallow models toward data-driven pattern recognition. The adoption of deep learning was highly asymmetric: CNN-based fault detection surged, whereas horizon interpretation largely remained multi-attribute and statistical. Methods were still dominated by 2D CNNs on local patches, foreshadowing the move to fully 3D architectures in the next stage. 

> 4.2.3 2019–2020: The rise of synthetic-data training

From 2019 to 2020, structural interpretation entered a fully deep-learning-driven stage in which 3D convolution and encoder–decoder architectures became central to fault and horizon workflows (Wu et al., 2019a,c). A milestone was FaultSeg3D (Wu et al., 2019a), which introduced a large-scale 3D synthetic fault dataset and trained a 3D U-Net to predict fault-probability volumes. By using synthetic labels at scale, FaultSeg3D substantially alleviated the 3D annotation bottleneck and demonstrated strong generalisation across multiple field surveys, establishing a synthetic-data-driven paradigm for deep 3D fault segmentation. Subsequent studies validated transfer learning from synthetic-pretrained CNNs to real data and further confirmed the viability of synthetic poststack amplitude maps as primary training resources (Cunha et al., 2020; Pochet et al., 2019). Building on this paradigm, many works adopted encoder–decoder networks for voxel-level fault prediction on seismic volumes (Liu et al., 2020a). Some frameworks jointly predicted fault probability along with strike and dip, enabling integrated estimation of geometric attributes (Wu et al., 2019c). Multi-task CNNs combined fault detection with structure-oriented smoothing and seismic-normal estimation to enhance fault responses while suppressing noise and acquisition footprints (Wu et al., 2019d). UNet++ variants improved feature reuse (Yang et al., 2020), and structure-sensitive “super-attributes” were proposed to better emphasise small-offset faults and weak-reflection fractures as network inputs (Di et al., 2019). Interpretability-guided CNNs also emerged to partially address the “black-box” concern by visualising seismic cues that drive segmentation decisions (Liu et al., 2020b). Horizon interpretation was similarly reshaped. Encoder–decoder CNNs enabled semi-automatic horizon extraction by predicting horizon images or probability volumes from 2D sections or 3D slices with minimal manual input (Wu et al., 2019b; Tschannen et al., 2020; Peters et al., 2019). Deep autoencoders were used to learn waveform embeddings for unsupervised horizon picking (Shi et al., 2020), and deep-learning-based RGT estimation provided a unified temporal framework for extracting stratigraphic sequences and horizons (Geng et al., 2020). Semi-supervised stratigraphy workflows further combined sparse annotations with CNN training, including joint fault-and-stratigraphy interpretation on field data (Di et al., 2020a,b). Early uncertainty quantification was also explored, including Bayesian deep-prior approaches for imaging and horizon tracking with uncertainty estimates and probabilistic tracking guided by transdimensional MCMC, as well as metrics that account for label ambiguity in fault and horizon evaluation (Siahkoohi et al., 2020; Cho et al., 2020; Guillon et al., 2020). Overall, synthetic data enabled a decisive shift from 2D slice-based workflows to full 3D volume segmentation, and the convergence of fault, horizon, and related tasks around 3D semantic-segmentation formulations laid the groundwork for subsequent advances. 

> 4.2.4 2021–2023: Maturation of deep learning

Following the synthetic-data breakthrough, structural interpretation saw rapid expansion of deep-learning methods, shifting the focus from feasibility to systematic improvements in architectures, losses, learning paradigms, and interpretability (An et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022a; Wei et al., 2022). Fault and horizon interpretation were widely reformulated as voxel-level semantic-segmentation tasks, with architectures spanning fully convolutional networks, residual and nested U-Nets, multiscale attention CNNs, and 2.5D designs that trade computational cost for volumetric 

> 13/45

context (Wu et al., 2021a; Gao et al., 2022b,a; Lin et al., 2022). Transformer-based variants also emerged to capture longer-range dependencies, including 2.5D Transformer U-Nets and Transformer-assisted dual U-Nets, alongside recurrent CNNs with compound losses (Tang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Ma et al., 2023). Loss-function design became a major emphasis due to extreme class imbalance, as faults often occupy less than 2% of a seismic volume. Studies systematically combined BCE-style losses with overlap-based terms such as Dice and IoU, and explored multi-scale fusion with imbalanced-learning strategies (Wei et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b). The MD loss was proposed to improve robustness under sparse or imperfect annotations by down-weighting anomalous labels (Dou et al., 2022b). Given the cost of 3D labels, weakly supervised and semi-supervised learning gained prominence. Attention-based 3D fault networks were trained with sparse 2D slice labels while leveraging large unlabelled volumes (Dou et al., 2022a). Knowledge distillation and structural augmentation using synthetic geometries provided additional pathways to improve label efficiency and expand training diversity (Wang et al., 2022a,b). Transfer learning and cross-survey adaptation were increasingly emphasised, typically pretraining on large synthetic datasets and fine-tuning on limited field labels, with progressive strategies designed to bridge differences in noise, bandwidth, and structural styles (Yan et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021). More physically realistic synthetic data generation, such as point-spread-function convolution, further improved field-data generalisation (Jing et al., 2023). Research also began to incorporate geological reasoning explicitly. Interpretational constraints and human-reasoning principles were embedded into CNN workflows to improve geological plausibility, while reviews consolidated the state of the field and highlighted open directions (Di et al., 2021a; Zhu et al., 2022; An et al., 2023). Uncertainty quantification matured as well: frameworks producing calibrated confidence maps alongside fault probabilities improved suitability for production workflows (Feng et al., 2021a). A notable trend was the rise of DeepRGT methods, which map seismic volumes to relative geologic time fields from which horizons and sequence architecture can be derived, shifting from geometric tracking toward deep temporal modelling (Bi et al., 2021). Multi-task designs jointly predicted RGT, horizons, and faults using priors and Transformer components, and weakly supervised or sequence-constrained horizon tracking further improved label efficiency and stratigraphic consistency (Yang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022a; Luo et al., 2023). Overall, 2021–2023 established deep learning as the dominant methodology for modern structural interpretation through coordinated advances in network design, losses, label efficiency, interpretability, and uncertainty estimation. 

> 4.2.5 2024–2025: Emergence of domain foundation models

During 2024–2025, structural interpretation moved toward self-supervised pretraining, SAM-based prompt-driven architectures, and emerging domain foundation models, alongside continued advances in lightweight networks, label-efficient learning, and uncertainty quantification (Zhang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Dou et al., 2024a). A defining trend is self-supervised pretraining for fault detection. Zhang et al. (2024) introduced a 3D Transformer with multi-scale decoding, pretrained on unlabelled seismic data and fine-tuned for fault recognition, while contrastive and reconstruction-based objectives were explored to learn structural features without annotations (Dou and Li, 2024). Pretrained 3D Transformers were also shown to support multiple downstream tasks, including fault detection, denoising, and horizon interpretation within a shared encoder (Wang et al., 2024a). Semi-supervised approaches such as FaultSSL combined limited labels with large unlabelled volumes to improve generalisation (Dou et al., 2024a). SAM-based architectures were adapted for interactive structural interpretation. Seismic Fault SAM enabled prompt-driven fault segmentation via lightweight modules and a 2.5D strategy, supporting point- or box-guided interaction (Chen et al., 2024). More broadly, multi-modal prompt engines and unified architectures were proposed for cross-survey segmentation of faults and other geobodies (Gao et al., 2026), and the promptable paradigm was further extended to multiple subsurface tasks within a single foundation model (Dou et al., 2025). Practical deployment motivated lightweight fault networks and systematic refinements of CNN baselines. Fault-Seg3D+ evaluated and improved CNN-based fault segmentation to address generalisation limits of the original synthetic-data paradigm (Li et al., 2024a). Other lightweight 3D designs introduced bidirectional decoding, dynamic scalability, or attribute-fusion modules to balance accuracy and efficiency (Tang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2024a). Transformer-based models continued to expand, including Transformer-enhanced fault detectors and volumetric Transformers for 3D horizon picking and horizon tracking (Zhou et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2025; Zhao and Zhao, 2025). Barely supervised strategies further pushed label efficiency through fault-orthogonal annotation and related schemes (Zhang et al., 2025a). Horizon interpretation advanced via deep-learning methods with uncertainty encoding and vertical constraints, as well as production-oriented semi-automatic workflows with explicit uncertainty quantification (Liao et al., 2024; Jung et al., 2025). Complementary directions included geologically consistent stratal-surface construction guided by 

> 14/45

geologic time surfaces and probabilistic fault interpretation based on marked point processes (Wang et al., 2024b; Taty Moukati et al., 2025). Overall, the period reflects a transition from survey-specific models toward pretrainable, promptable, and cross-survey transferable frameworks. Self-supervised pretraining improves robustness to style and noise variation, SAM-style prompting enables human-in-the-loop editing, and lightweight plus label-efficient designs address production constraints. Looking further ahead, early efforts have begun to embed such interactive models within LLM-orchestrated agent workflows that translate natural-language goals into concrete interpretation operations (Kanfar et al., 2025; Ren et al., 2025), although this direction is still highly exploratory. 

Figure 7. Results of the CIG-Bench-fault model with skip connections. The above raw seismic data are sourced from Nlog and the USGS. 

> 4.2.6 Summary and outlook

From an overall perspective, the development of seismic structural interpretation has largely followed a trajectory similar to that of computer vision, evolving from workflows based on manually designed seismic attributes and other handcrafted features toward end-to-end learning based interpretation (Bergen et al., 2019; Yu and Ma, 2021; Wrona et al., 2021). Unlike computer vision, however, the transition toward a relatively mature stage in structural interpretation has not been marked by any single network architecture. Instead, it has been enabled primarily by the proposal and widespread adoption of systematic synthetic data methodologies, which provide scalable labels, controlled structural variability, and reproducible evaluation protocols (Wu et al., 2019a; Cunha et al., 2020). Among the major task categories, fault related interpretation is currently the most widely deployed in practice, yet it still exhibits persistent limitations (An et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a). Generalization remains inadequate for deep intervals with weak seismic responses and low signal-to-noise ratios, as well as for complex tectonic styles such as strike slip systems with branching geometries and thrust related deformation. Under strong noise and acquisition footprints, automated models can also generate numerous false positives and spatially incoherent artifacts, which limits reliability in industrial settings. In comparison, horizon interpretation has not yet formed an equally universal solution despite progress in synthetic data and learning based pipelines (Tschannen et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019b). Sparse marker horizon picking is often highly survey-specific and typically succeeds only for a small number of horizons with stable seismic responses, making it difficult to generalize cross-survey areas, stratigraphic sequences, and complex structural conditions (Peters et al., 2019; Lou et al., 2020). Methods with stronger transferability frequently rely on dense stratigraphic representations such as RGT to support correlation and horizon tracking (Bi et al., 2021; Geng et al., 2020; Di et al., 2022). Nevertheless, accuracy and stability can degrade sharply in strongly deformed regions where strata are intensely disrupted and where unconformities and thrust nappes are prevalent, leading to reduced global consistency, axis crossing artifacts, and limited robustness under cross-survey distribution shifts (Geng et al., 2020; Bi et al., 2021). As a consequence, current approaches often struggle to meet industrial requirements for consistency and accuracy in complex structural settings. Looking ahead, fault interpretation research must continue to address several particularly challenging scenarios, 

> 15/45

including deep faults with weak seismic responses, strike slip faults and their branching systems, and strongly nonlinear deformation associated with thrusting and nappe emplacement (An et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a). Semi-automatic and interactive promptable paradigms can improve controllability and interpretation consistency through user guided constraints (Gao et al., 2026). However, for fault systems dominated by dense populations of small scale faults and complex spatial connectivity, heavy interaction can substantially increase manual workload and reduce overall efficiency. A promising direction is therefore to combine the throughput of fully automated segmentation with lightweight interactive refinement, where automation provides reliable initial fault volumes and targeted user inputs support rapid local correction and uncertainty guided editing. For horizon interpretation, RGT estimation is likely to remain the most general pathway for constructing 3D stratigraphic frameworks, provided that stronger constraints and consistency control are incorporated (Geng et al., 2020; Bi et al., 2021). Integrating geological and geophysical priors into learning, including fault geometry and displacement constraints, stratigraphic topological continuity, local monotonicity and smoothness, and anchoring to well tops or key interfaces, can suppress unrealistic oscillation and long range drift. In addition, sparse interactive inputs can serve as high value anchors to guide corrections in high uncertainty regions while preserving automatic efficiency elsewhere. A fused paradigm, with dense RGT as the backbone, physics consistent constraints as regulators, and sparse human anchors as guidance, is expected to improve global consistency and cross-survey generalization, and to provide a more stable representation for automatic horizon generation and subsequent structural modeling. 

> 4.2.7 CIG-Bench-Fault and RGT results

The fault model uses the skip-connection HRNet variant and predicts a probability volume that is thresholded into a fault mask. Anisotropic rescaling ( scale_t , scale_h , scale_w ) is exposed so that the model can be adapted to surveys with non-square spatial sampling. The optional rank and chunk_size arguments split inference into chunks along the depth axis to keep GPU memory bounded on large field volumes (Li and Wu, 2025).                                 

> 1from cig_bench.predictor.fault import FaultPredictor
> 23fault_predictor =FaultPredictor(device="cuda")
> 4prob, used =fault_predictor.predict(
> 5seis,
> 6rank=4, chunk_size=64, #memory-bounded inference
> 7threshold=0.5,
> 8scale_t=0.5, scale_h=0.85, scale_w=0.85,
> 9resize_back=True, #return result at the original (T,H,W)
> 10 )
> 11 fault.visualize(used, prob)

Figure 7 presents the fault segmentation results of the CIG-Bench-fault model on representative field seismic volumes. (a-1) and (a-2) show a fault-intensive area from the Netherlands F3 dataset, which is a classic benchmark widely used for testing seismic fault detection methods. The proposed model delineates the major fault framework clearly and, more importantly, successfully detects the small-scale polygonal faults developed near the shallow part of the volume, demonstrating its advantage in identifying subtle and densely distributed fault systems. (b-1) and (b-2) show another Netherlands seismic example with more intensive polygonal fault development. The predicted fault surfaces form a dense and spatially coherent polygonal network, indicating that the model can capture short, discontinuous, and intersecting fault segments in complex shallow stratigraphic settings. (c-1) and (c-2) show the results on the USGS seismic data, where faults are extremely dense and exhibit complex spatial intersections and variable scales. The model still produces a clear fault interpretation and effectively preserves the continuity of individual fault traces. (d-1) and (d-2) show a typical deep-rooted fault system in the USGS data. The model accurately identifies the dominant deep fault and maintains a continuous fault response along its dipping plane, while also detecting associated secondary faults in the surrounding strata. These results demonstrate the robustness of the CIG-Bench-fault model in handling both subtle polygonal faults and large-scale deep faults across different field datasets. The RGT model regresses a smooth relative-geologic-time volume; horizons are then extracted as iso-surfaces of that volume. Optional sparse horizon annotations can be supplied as two auxiliary channels ( horizon_rgt 

and horizon_mask ) to constrain the prediction. The number of horizons returned by extract_horizons is controlled by n_horizons .        

> 1from cig_bench.predictor.rgt import RGTPredictor
> 23rgt_predictor =RGTPredictor( device="cuda")
> 16/45

Figure 8. Results of the CIG-Bench-RGT model. We used the training strategy of RGT-Est (Dou et al., 2026). The above raw seismic data are sourced from Nlog and the USGS. The left column shows the seismic data, the middle column shows the RGT volume predicted by the model, and the right column displays the horizons extracted from the RGT volume and overlaid on the seismic data.            

> 4rgt_vol, used =rgt_predictor.predict(seis)
> 5horizons =rgt_predictor.extract_horizons(rgt_vol, n_horizons=100)
> 6rgt_predictor.visualize(used, rgt_vol, horizons)

Figure 8 shows the RGT estimation results of the CIG-Bench-RGT model on field seismic data from Nlog and the USGS. We used the training strategy of RGT-Est (Dou et al., 2026). The left column presents the original seismic volumes, the middle column shows the RGT volumes predicted by the model, and the right column displays horizons extracted from the predicted RGT volumes and overlaid on the seismic data. The examples cover several challenging geological settings, including slope bodies, unconformities, densely faulted zones, and multiple stratigraphic packages with different structural styles. Despite these complexities, the predicted RGT volumes remain smooth and stratigraphically consistent, while preserving the main discontinuities caused by faults and erosional surfaces. The extracted horizons closely follow the seismic reflections and maintain good lateral continuity across folded strata, steeply dipping layers, fault-controlled deformation, and unconformity-bounded sequences. These results demonstrate that the CIG-Bench-RGT model can robustly recover the subsurface stratigraphic framework from complex field seismic volumes and provide reliable horizon information for subsequent structural interpretation. 

> 17/45

4.3 Geobody 

Figure 9. The figure summarizes the technological evolution and paradigm shifts in geobody interpretation over the past decade, driven by advances in machine learning and deep learning. Using stage-specific keywords and representative milestones, it delineates the research focus of each phase and its central transitions. Figure 9 summarizes the evolutionary trajectory of geobody interpretation over the past decade, from multiscale attribute enhancement and sparse-representation tools, through the early penetration of machine learning (accelerated by public competitions such as the TGS Salt Challenge), to the dominance of 3D end-to-end deep learning and, most recently, the exploration of domain foundation models with self-supervised pretraining and prompt-based interaction. Each phase is discussed in detail in the following subsections. Whether the foundation-model route proves durable remains to be confirmed through longer-term practical validation. 

> 4.3.1 2015–2016: Seismic-attribute-driven interpretation

During this period, geobody identification remained grounded in attribute engineering as its primary technical foundation, yet it began to transition toward probabilistic-field modeling, supervised learning, and sparse rep-resentation frameworks (Wang et al., 2015a; Wu, 2016). Early studies relied on multiscale and multidirectional seismic attributes—such as amplitude, envelope, spectral decomposition, and curvature—using attribute blending and visualization techniques to enhance the contrast between target geobodies and the surrounding background (Chinwuko et al., 2015). The central goal at this stage was to construct a three-dimensional interpretive workspace that aided human interpreters, rather than to achieve fully automatic geobody segmentation. Building on this foundation, researchers gradually introduced more systematic image-processing and pattern-recognition approaches to improve boundary detection and three-dimensional tracking robustness (Qi et al., 2015). Representative strategies included applying edge-preserving filters to smooth multi-attribute volumes while main-taining geometric interfaces, followed by attribute-space clustering to separate targets from background. Other work exploited frequency-domain texture gradients, subspace learning, and noise-adjusted principal component analysis to ensure continuous boundary tracking even under strong noise and acquisition footprints (Wang et al., 2015a). At the same time, some studies reformulated geobody identification as a probabilistic-field estimation or optimization problem. One class of methods fused multiple attributes into a unified likelihood volume, from which geobody interfaces were extracted using three-dimensional image-analysis techniques (Wu, 2016). Another class leveraged local texture features to train codebook or dictionary models, using sparse representation and supervised classification to achieve automatic segmentation on large-scale seismic volumes (Ramirez et al., 2016; Amin and Deriche, 2016). Overall, this stage marked a shift from heuristic, threshold-based multi-attribute segmentation toward more optimizable and verifiable mathematical formulations, laying the conceptual groundwork for the emergence of deep-learning-based geobody interpretation in subsequent years. 

> 4.3.2 2017–2018: Early adoption of machine learning

From 2017 to 2018, geobody identification entered an early machine-learning stage, as convolutional neural networks were first applied to salt classification while attribute-based and clustering workflows continued to develop (Waldeland et al., 2018; Waldeland and Solberg, 2017). For salt bodies, attribute clustering remained common. Di et al. (2018b) proposed a multi-attribute k-means workflow that computes amplitude, phase, texture, and related attributes and then performs unsupervised partitioning 

> 18/45

for salt-boundary delineation. The key shift was the adoption of CNNs: Waldeland and Solberg (2017) showed that deep learning can unify feature extraction and classification, outperforming attribute-then-classify pipelines, and Waldeland et al. (2018) generalised this idea toward automated seismic interpretation, becoming the most cited geobody work of the period and establishing CNNs as a viable paradigm for geobody segmentation. Public initiatives such as the TGS Salt Identification Challenge on Kaggle further accelerated community uptake of 2D segmentation networks for salt interpretation. For channel geobodies, research still emphasised multiscale and multidirectional attribute characterisation. Shearlet transforms were used to detect channel boundaries by exploiting anisotropy across scales and orientations (Karbalaali et al., 2017, 2018), while GLCM-based texture attributes and directional structure-tensor coherence provided complementary cues for channel and discontinuity detection (Mohebian et al., 2018; Wu, 2017). Deep learning had not yet become central for channel interpretation in this period. Karst geobodies saw early machine-learning explorations. Statistical neural-network imaging of karst systems in 3D seismic addressed complex void geometries (Ebuna et al., 2018), and an optimised CNN was proposed for karst-cave reservoir identification (Cai et al., 2018). Overall, 2017–2018 marked a transition from feature engineering to image-pattern recognition, most prominently for salt, while channels largely remained attribute-driven and karst began to adopt early neural approaches. 

> 4.3.3 2019–2023: Deep-learning consolidation

From 2019 to 2023, geobody identification entered a relatively mature stage dominated by deep learning, with geobody extraction increasingly formulated as end-to-end 3D segmentation using encoder–decoder networks for voxel-level prediction (Shi et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2021a). Salt-body segmentation advanced most rapidly. Shi et al. (2019) introduced SaltSeg, a 3D CNN framework for automatic salt segmentation (the most cited work of this period). Subsequent studies explored production-scale pipelines, improved UNet variants for joint salt and fault detection, and interactive salt segmentation, alongside systematic comparisons of architectures and regularisation strategies for stable training and better generalisation (Sen et al., 2020; Alfarhan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a; Di and AlRegib, 2020; Islam, 2020; Sen et al., 2019). Unlike faults, however, purely synthetic-data training was less straightforward for salt due to semantic ambiguity in amplitudes and high morphological diversity (Warren et al., 2023). Label scarcity motivated extensive semi-supervised and weakly supervised learning for salt interpretation. Ensemble- and teacher-student-based frameworks, iterative pseudo-labelling, boundary-aware losses, and edge-guided branches improved performance under sparse or coarse labels (Babakhin et al., 2019; Geng et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2021). Knowledge distillation variants were also explored to compress and enhance salt models, and semi-supervised segmentation was extended to broader seismic interpretation tasks (Li et al., 2023c; Wang et al., 2023c). Channel interpretation similarly transitioned to deep learning. Pham et al. (2019) demonstrated automatic channel detection with deep networks, and ChannelSeg3D combined process-based channel simulation for synthetic training data with 3D segmentation models (Gao et al., 2021a, 2020). ResNet-style methods were applied to complex channel settings, while uncertainty and interpretability analyses addressed reliability requirements for automated workflows (Li et al., 2022; Pham and Fomel, 2021). Attribute-combination strategies and ANN-based approaches remained complementary for specific channel-related targets (Khasraji-Nejad et al., 2021; Ismail et al., 2022). Karst interpretation emerged as a smaller but growing sub-field. Bayesian deep learning provided probabilistic characterisation of paleocaves, tree-based models were used for cavity identification from impedance images, and CNNs with transfer learning targeted the scarcity of labelled karst data (Zhang et al., 2022a; Kouassi et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). Self-supervised and interactive approaches also appeared, including label-free structure delineation via latent-space projection and flood-filling networks for expert-in-the-loop geobody tracking (Aribido et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021). Overall, 2019–2023 established 3D end-to-end segmentation as the dominant paradigm, supported by advances in architectures, losses, and label-efficient learning. 

> 4.3.4 2024–2025: Emergence of domain foundation models

From 2024 to 2025, geobody interpretation was increasingly re-oriented around domain foundation models, which aim to learn unified, transferable subsurface representations that support geobody segmentation cross-surveys and geobody types within a single pretrained backbone (Sheng et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2026; Islam and Wali, 2024). Rather than advancing primarily through task-specific network tweaks, the field shifted toward scalable pretraining on large seismic corpora, prompt-driven interaction, and standardised evaluation resources that together enable stronger cross-survey generalisation and more practical deployment. 

> 19/45

In this context, the seismic foundation model pretrained on 192 global surveys demonstrated that large-scale pretraining can deliver robust transfer to downstream interpretation tasks, including geobody segmentation, under limited labelled data (Sheng et al., 2025). Complementing this, foundation architectures equipped with multi-modal prompt engines extended segmentation from passive automation to expert-in-the-loop workflows, allowing different prompt modalities to control and refine predictions across diverse geobody categories (Gao et al., 2026). Cross-domain adaptation from computer-vision foundation models to geophysical imagery further reinforced the premise that reusable pretrained representations can mitigate chronic data curation constraints in geoscience (Guo et al., 2025a). Recent unified promptable frameworks have synthesised these ideas to span structural interpretation, geobody delineation, and property interpretation within a single model, illustrating a broader move toward general-purpose subsurface understanding rather than single-task pipelines (Dou et al., 2025). Alongside this model shift, the release of large-scale benchmark datasets provided the infrastructure needed to train and compare foundation-model adaptations reproducibly, while Transformer-based and interactive segmentation methods were increasingly integrated as modular components within foundation-model-centric workflows (Wang et al., 2025). Overall, a salient feature of this period is the growing exploration of geobody interpretation around domain foundation models, where pretraining, prompting, and benchmarking jointly aim at the cross-survey scalability that earlier deep-learning approaches struggled to achieve. 

> 4.3.5 Summary and outlook

Compared with the other three interpretation tasks, geobody analysis has received relatively less attention (Islam and Wali, 2024). In traditional workflows, geobodies are often treated as secondary products derived after inversion and attribute modeling via thresholding, clustering, or connectivity analysis. If geobodies are treated as explicit targets, large-scale manual annotation is usually required, and both label acquisition and quality control are difficult (Shi et al., 2019; Warren et al., 2023). Although deep learning segmentation enables direct identification of salt bodies, channels, and karst systems (Shi et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2019; Yan et al., 2025), cross-survey generalization remains challenging due to heterogeneous imaging quality, differences in acquisition and processing, and highly variable morphology (Di and AlRegib, 2020; Sen et al., 2020). These factors have hindered the formation of mature benchmarks and stable engineering workflows comparable to fault interpretation (Wu et al., 2019a). Accordingly, engineering level deployment of AI based geobody interpretation remains limited, mainly due to weak cross-survey robustness and limited adaptability to complex morphologies (Geng et al., 2022; Babakhin et al., 2019). Interactive promptable paradigms can improve controllability by using sparse prompts to guide rapid refinement cross-surveys and geobody types, partially mitigating the instability of fully automatic methods (Gao et al., 2026). Nevertheless, robust generalization ultimately requires broader and more realistic 3D datasets with standardized protocols, together with richer geological and geophysical priors (Sheng et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025). Looking ahead, a priority is to establish a comprehensive 3D benchmark suite that covers production level scale, resolution, and signal-to-noise ratio, and is representative across geobody types, morphological complexity, structural context, and imaging conditions, supported by unified splits, guidelines, and metrics. Methodologically, because geobody boundaries are intrinsically ambiguous under bandwidth limits and noise, future models should incorporate priors such as shape and connectivity constraints, stratigraphic and structural controls, attribute consistency regularization, and sparse anchoring to well logs or existing interpretation products. A practical pathway is to combine automatic segmentation with lightweight interactive refinement, enabling efficient initial interpretations and targeted correction in high uncertainty regions, and ultimately producing stable, transferable models that support downstream tasks including structural modeling and reservoir characterization. 

> 4.3.6 CIG-Bench-Geobody results

CIG-Bench currently provides geobody baselines for channels and karst caves; salt bodies, although extensively discussed in the Geobody review above, are not included in the present release. This is because purely synthetic-data training has proven less straightforward for salt due to semantic ambiguity in amplitudes and high morphological diversity (Warren et al., 2023), and a unified synthetic salt generation pipeline consistent with our channel and karst pipelines is still under development. Both geobody predictors share the same multi-scale ensemble strategy: inference is run at multiple spatial scales by default (the specific scale set is configurable; see the code below for a typical 5-scale example) and the resulting probability volumes are accumulated. A configurable post-processing step removes small connected components, which is important for suppressing the spurious responses observed in the field-data results discussed later in this section.                                

> 20/45 1from cig_bench.predictor.channel import ChannelPredictor
> 23channel_predictor =ChannelPredictor(device="cuda")
> 4scores, used =channel_predictor.predict(
> 5seis,
> 6scales=[0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5], #custom scale set
> 7accumulate="sum",
> 8)
> 9mask =channel_predictor.postprocess(scores, threshold=0.75, min_size=50000)
> 10 channel_predictor.visualize(used, scores, mask)

The karst predictor is used identically, only the checkpoint changes. Figure 10 presents the geobody segmentation results of the CIG-Bench-Channel and CIG-Bench-Karst models on three field seismic datasets. Panels (a), (b), and (c) correspond to the New Zealand Parihaka, New Zealand Romney, and USGS G3D datasets, respectively. In each row, the left column shows the original seismic volume, the middle column shows the predicted segmentation results overlaid on seismic data, and the right column displays the extracted three-dimensional geobody objects. Overall, the results indicate that the CIG-Bench models can identify several channel-related and karst-related geobodies from field seismic volumes and provide a preliminary three-dimensional representation of their spatial distributions. However, fully automatic channel detection remains highly challenging, especially across different survey areas. Channel bodies often show weak seismic responses, discontinuous boundaries, strong lateral variability, and similar amplitude patterns to surrounding depositional or structural features, which makes cross-survey generalization difficult. The CIG-Bench-Channel results still contain missed detections, fragmented channel bodies, and false positive responses in some areas, suggesting that robust channel segmentation in broader field datasets remains an open problem. Compared with channel detection, the karst examples in panel (c) show more distinct vertical and clustered geobody responses, but the model may still suffer from over-segmentation and incomplete boundary delineation. 

Figure 10. Results of the CIG-Bench-Channel and CIG-Bench-Karst models. Panels (a), (b), and (c) show examples from the New Zealand Parihaka, the New Zealand Romney, and the USGS G3D, respectively. 

21/45 4.4 Facies 

Figure 11. The figure summarizes the technological evolution and paradigm shifts in facies interpretation over the past decade, driven by advances in machine learning and deep learning. Using stage-specific keywords and representative milestones, it delineates the research focus of each phase and its central transitions. Figure 11 summarizes the evolution of seismic facies interpretation over the past decade, from seismic-attribute clustering and probabilistic characterization, through the adoption of unsupervised multi-attribute learning, to deep feature clustering, contrastive learning, and 3D segmentation, and most recently toward self-supervised learning, Transformers, and pretraining paradigms aimed at more generalizable and reusable representations. The individual phases are detailed in the following subsections. 

> 4.4.1 2015–2016: Seismic-attribute-driven interpretation

From 2015 to 2016, seismic-facies research remained in a seismic-attribute–based stage, where the central objective was to design discriminative attribute combinations and classify facies in multi-attribute space. Coherence, variance, amplitude, phase, and texture attributes were widely computed, and multiscale, multidirectional responses—such as Kuwahara-filtered volumes—were used to sharpen contrasts between neighbouring facies groups, making attribute design, combination, and visualization the determining factors for methodological performance (Qi et al., 2016). Beyond absolute amplitude magnitudes, amplitude variation patterns were also explored as classification inputs, improving the identification of facies in weak-amplitude areas (Liu and Wang, 2015). Algorithmically, multi-attribute values from voxels or small windows were concatenated into feature vectors, and clustering was performed in attribute space using k-means, self-organising maps (SOM), generative topographic mapping (GTM), support vector machines (SVM), Gaussian mixture models, and artificial neural networks (Zhao et al., 2015; Zhao and Marfurt, 2015). Zhao et al. (2015) systematically compared six such classifiers on a single turbidite data set and concluded that, although supervised methods yielded accurate estimates of desired facies, unsupervised methods could also highlight features that might otherwise be overlooked. Building on this, Qi et al. (2016) proposed a semisupervised workflow in which the interpreter manually painted target facies to generate training data; candidate attributes were evaluated by cross-correlating their per-facies histograms, and Kuwahara filtering significantly increased discrimination. Unlabelled voxels were then classified via probability density functions projected on a GTM manifold, producing a probability volume for each user-defined facies. To maintain geological plausibility, several works explicitly incorporated geological priors into the classification or post-processing stage. Gonzalez et al. (2016) demonstrated that, in a turbidite setting with sparse well control, augmenting the initial lithofluid-facies model with rock types expected from the depositional environment—but not sampled at the well—and combining spatially variant prior probabilities with data likelihoods through Bayesian estimation substantially reduced prediction bias. Probabilistic facies volumes and entropy-based uncertainty metrics were further introduced to shift facies interpretation away from single hard classifications toward quantitative probabilistic descriptions (Yuan et al., 2016). Notably, a first attempt at applying deep learning to seismic-facies recognition also appeared during this period: Li et al. (2016) used a Deep Belief Network (DBN) stacked from Restricted Boltzmann Machines to extract features directly from multi-sample seismic inputs for lithology recognition, foreshadowing the data-driven feature-learning paradigm that would dominate later years. Overall, the feature representations at this stage were still predominantly hand-crafted, and most seismic-facies 

> 22/45

problems had been reformulated as clustering and probabilistic-modelling tasks in high-dimensional attribute space. The coexistence of traditional machine-learning classifiers and the nascent introduction of deep architectures such as DBN laid the methodological groundwork for the subsequent rapid adoption of deep-learning techniques. 

> 4.4.2 2017–2020: Early adoption of machine learning

From 2017 to 2020, seismic-facies analysis entered an early-adoption stage of machine learning, during which data-driven approaches expanded from traditional clustering to deep-learning architectures (Wrona et al., 2018; Ross and Cole, 2017; Alaudah et al., 2019). Methods in this period generally followed two perspectives: a stratal (attribute-driven) perspective and a profile-based (image-segmentation) perspective. The stratal perspective interprets facies along horizon-aligned or stratigraphically constrained slices, which better conforms to depositional architecture and can yield more geologically consistent delineation (Zhao et al., 2017, 2018). However, it typically requires heavier data preparation, stronger structural constraints, and greater interpretive effort. In contrast, the profile-based perspective performs facies partitioning on inline or crossline sections and formulates the problem as image segmentation (Liu et al., 2020c; Zhang et al., 2020). This workflow is more streamlined and computationally efficient, but it often produces coarser results and has limited ability to resolve fine facies boundaries and internal variability. Under the stratal perspective, many studies combined multi-attribute feature vectors with clustering or supervised classification. A typical workflow computes diverse seismic attributes, including texture descriptors such as the gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) (Di and Gao, 2017b), and then clusters or classifies voxels using k-means, self-organising maps, or random forests (Song et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019). Multi-waveform classification was also proposed to improve stability and stratigraphic continuity (Song et al., 2017), and alternative feature-extraction strategies, including speech-recognition-inspired parameters, were introduced to enhance sensitivity to reservoir characteristics (Ebuna et al., 2018). Several works emphasised geological constraints by reassigning or smoothing labels using facies proportions, sequence boundaries, or palaeoenvironmental priors, and by incorporating spatial regularisation (e.g., Markov random fields or geostatistical filtering) to improve continuity (Zhao et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2020). Attribute selection received increasing attention, with data-adaptive weighting and SHAP-based interpretability analyses used to identify discriminative subsets (Zhao et al., 2018; Qi et al., 2020; Lubo-Robles et al., 2020). In parallel, image-segmentation–based facies analysis rose rapidly, using inline or crossline profiles as primary inputs (Alaudah et al., 2019; Ross and Cole, 2017). Public benchmark releases, particularly the Netherlands F3 block, reduced the barrier to supervised learning and accelerated method development (Alaudah et al., 2019). In particular, Zhao (2018) was among the first to introduce convolutional neural networks into seismic-facies classification, systematically comparing several CNN architectures and demonstrating their effectiveness for profile-based facies partitioning. Many studies adopted computer-vision architectures, including CNNs, encoder–decoder networks, and GANs, to enable efficient facies partitioning and volume-wide propagation (Liu et al., 2020c; Zhang et al., 2019; Grana et al., 2020). Deep convolutional autoencoders further enabled unsupervised facies analysis on prestack data via end-to-end feature learning without manually designed attributes (Qian et al., 2018; Duan et al., 2019). Semi-supervised GAN-based strategies mitigated label scarcity (Liu et al., 2020c), while Bayesian deep-learning approaches using Monte Carlo dropout provided voxel-wise uncertainty estimates alongside predictions (Mukhopadhyay and Mallick, 2019). Comparative studies suggested that deep learning and Monte Carlo–based probabilistic methods can reach similar accuracy, while offering complementary advantages in uncertainty characterisation (Grana et al., 2020). Overall, this period marks the first rapid expansion of machine learning in seismic-facies interpretation (Lubo-Robles and Marfurt, 2019; Feng et al., 2020). Compared with structural targets such as faults or horizons, facies are inherently more ambiguous and variable, depending on depositional environment, scale, and interpretive objectives. Accordingly, studies adopted divergent definitions of “facies” and heterogeneous technical pathways, underscoring the need for standardised benchmarks and reproducible evaluation protocols, a gap that the F3 dataset began to address (Alaudah et al., 2019). 

> 4.4.3 2021–2023: Deep-learning consolidation

From 2021 to 2023, seismic-facies research entered a relatively mature stage dominated by deep learning (Li et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2021b; Zhang et al., 2021a). The two methodological perspectives established earlier—profile-based segmentation and stratal-perspective analysis—continued to advance in parallel, while label-efficient learning became a central theme. Driven by the convenient organisation of inline/crossline profiles, the availability of open benchmark datasets (e.g. SEG 2020 open data), and natural compatibility with semantic segmentation, profile-based facies segmentation grew rapidly (Xu and Haq, 2022; Chai et al., 2022). Architectures evolved from UNet variants (Tolstaya and Egorov, 2022) to attention-augmented CNNs (Li et al., 2021), DeepLabv3+/GAN-based frameworks (Kaur et al., 2023), and 

> 23/45

vision transformers such as SegFormer-style encoder–decoder designs (Wang et al., 2023d). Beyond architecture, tailored losses and training strategies were introduced to address class imbalance, improve detection of thin facies and subtle boundaries, and preserve geometric continuity (Chen et al., 2022a; Zhan et al., 2023). Explainability also received increasing attention, with attention maps and intrinsic interpretation methods used to identify seismic cues underlying model decisions and to mitigate the “black-box” concern (Noh et al., 2023; Li et al., 2021; Lubo-Robles et al., 2022). For stratal-perspective 3D facies analysis, research largely transitioned from hand-crafted attributes to deep feature representations, replacing attribute clustering with deep feature clustering (Puzyrev and Elders, 2022; Li et al., 2023d). Deep features enabled joint representation of structural context and depositional variability, facilitating modelling of continuous facies belts and quasi-3D stratigraphic units. RGT was incorporated as an explicit constraint in CNN-based facies classification to enforce stratigraphic ordering and depositional continuity (Di et al., 2021b). Semi-supervised fuzzy clustering on extended elastic impedance was also explored to bridge well-scale and seismic-scale facies definitions (Mirzakhanian and Hashemi, 2022). A defining theme was reduced reliance on manual labels. Deep feature clustering and contrastive learning were widely adopted, often via unsupervised pretraining (e.g. autoencoding or masked reconstruction) followed by contrastive refinement across profiles or stratigraphic units (Li et al., 2023d,e). Semi-supervised learning combined limited labels with large unlabelled volumes using autoencoders or GANs (Liu et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). Active learning was proposed to prioritise informative samples for annotation (Mustafa and AlRegib, 2023), while few-shot and prototype-based methods targeted rapid adaptation to new surveys (Zhao et al., 2023). Domain adaptation further addressed cross-survey generalisation by transferring representations from labelled source data to unlabelled targets (Nasim et al., 2022). Bayesian deep-learning frameworks also matured, providing calibrated voxel-wise uncertainty estimates (Feng et al., 2021b), while classical probabilistic approaches such as Markov chain Monte Carlo remained relevant for posterior facies inference (Grana et al., 2023). Overall, progress during this period was largely incremental—improving architectures, label efficiency, and uncertainty quantification—while persistent challenges, including cross-survey generalisation, label scarcity, and geological interpretability, were increasingly recognised but not yet systematically resolved (Xu and Haq, 2022; Babikir et al., 2022). 

> 4.4.4 2024–2025: Advanced deep-learning models

The 2024–2025 period is marked by foundation-model adaptation, automated architecture design, and multi-task learning, collectively pushing seismic-facies interpretation toward higher efficiency, stronger generalisation, and greater interactivity (Chikhaoui and Alfarraj, 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025b). A key development is the transfer of large pretrained vision models to facies segmentation. FaciesSAM adapts the Fast Segment Anything Model by decomposing the workflow into ’Segment All’ and prompt-guided ’Segment One’, enabling human-in-the-loop interpretation with improved controllability and editability (Atolagbe and Koeshidayat-ullah, 2025). More broadly, general-purpose models such as the seismic foundation model (Sheng et al., 2025) and the Geological Everything Model 3D (Dou et al., 2025) demonstrate that representations pretrained on large seismic corpora can transfer to facies segmentation and other downstream tasks in zero-shot or few-shot regimes, suggesting a possible shift from task-specific training toward unified, promptable subsurface understanding—although the long-term viability of this direction, largely borrowed from the success of foundation models in other fields, still awaits broader practical validation. AutoML has also gained visibility. Neural architecture search (NAS) methods such as PC-DARTS-SFC use differ-entiable search to discover architectures better suited to facies classification than hand-crafted designs, outperforming the original PC-DARTS on the F3 benchmark and highlighting the practical value of automated optimisation in geophysical settings (Gao et al., 2024). Meanwhile, incremental architectural refinements, including improved deep dilated CNNs with expanded receptive fields, continue to yield measurable gains in boundary delineation (Yang et al., 2024b). Self-supervised learning (SSL) matured into a practical response to label scarcity. Chikhaoui and Alfarraj (2024) show that reconstruction-based SSL pretraining followed by fine-tuning can reach performance comparable to fully supervised learning using only 5%–10% labelled data on the F3 and Penobscot datasets, while also improving cross-domain adaptation under limited annotation. In parallel, the release of cigFacies provides substantially larger and more diverse data resources for both supervised and self-supervised paradigms (Gao et al., 2025). Additional trends include spatiotemporal modelling and multi-task coupling. Convolutional LSTM-style designs capture spatial structure and inter-slice dependencies to improve delineation of thin interbeds and weak interfaces (Tian et al., 2025). Multi-task frameworks such as SRSS-Net jointly perform super-resolution and segmentation, stabilising facies prediction under low-resolution inputs (Guo et al., 2025b). RGT-constrained workflows continued 

> 24/45

to mature, with sensitivity analyses indicating improved accuracy and continuity and robustness to moderate RGT errors (Wu et al., 2024). Graph-based and hybrid methods further integrate geological adjacency and traditional constraints, while Bayesian and stochastic approaches remain relevant for uncertainty-aware prediction (Alswaidan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c; Fernandes et al., 2024a). Although this period saw a series of advances, it did not resolve the fundamental challenges of seismic facies research in the machine learning setting, most notably how to define facies and how to establish standardized datasets and evaluation protocols. 

> 4.4.5 Summary and outlook

Seismic facies link structural interpretation, geobody analysis, and property interpretation, and therefore occupy a central position in the interpretation workflow (Xu and Haq, 2022; Wrona et al., 2018). Although seismic facies has attracted far more research than geobodies, progress has mostly been incremental within established deep learning pipelines, largely emphasizing feature extraction and segmentation architectures rather than redefining the task or the interpretational paradigm (Alaudah et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2018). Most profile based studies still rely on a few public datasets and representative surveys such as F3 and Parihaka (Alaudah et al., 2019; Chai et al., 2022), which makes models highly dataset dependent and weakly transferable across basins and data conditions (Li et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020c; Zhang et al., 2021a). A key bottleneck is the lack of an operationally consistent task definition: sectional and horizon based facies depend strongly on scale, label semantics, and geological context, so labeling systems and evaluation protocols vary widely and results are often not comparable or reproducible. We argue that the priority is to establish an evaluable, cross-survey task definition and benchmark framework (Sheng et al., 2025; Dou et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2025). This requires reproducible annotation guidelines and hierarchical labels, representations that reconcile sectional, horizon based, and volumetric views, and metrics that emphasize cross-survey generalization, semantic consistency, boundary uncertainty, and interpretation utility rather than within dataset pixel level accuracy. Shared community standards in both methodology and evaluation are essential to move seismic facies analysis from experience driven practice toward a systematic and transferable paradigm. 

> 4.4.6 CIG-Bench-Facies results

Because seismic facies are conceptually ill-defined, their delineation often depends on interpreter expertise, research objectives, and the geological context of a given survey area, which makes it difficult to establish consistent class boundaries and annotation criteria. Moreover, existing studies differ substantially in the number of facies classes, labeling taxonomies, interpretation scale (sectional view versus horizon-based view), and supervision regime (fully supervised, weakly supervised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised). As a result, neither the methodological landscape nor the evaluation protocols have converged to a widely accepted standard. Under these conditions, CIG-Bench cannot provide a single “unified facies baseline” that is directly reusable across datasets and labeling systems. Doing so would risk producing non comparable performance conclusions under inconsistent label semantics, which would in turn undermine the credibility and interpretability of the benchmark. We anticipate that seismic facies research will achieve milestone advances that move the field beyond survey and interpreter dependent empirical practices, toward a standardized research framework in which both data and methods are more clearly defined, reproducible, and comparable. 

4.5 Property 

Figure 12 summarizes the evolution of property interpretation over the past decade, from physics- and model-driven constrained inversion, through the emergence of learning-based 1D trace-level estimation, to 2D/3D end-to-end deep inversion with transfer and weak/semi-supervised learning, and most recently toward cross-survey generalization and prompt-driven, pretraining-based unified formulations (Dou et al., 2025). Each phase is detailed in the following subsections; whether the most recent prompt-driven approaches can be sustained and reliably deployed in practice still requires longer-term validation. 

> 4.5.1 2015–2017: Physics- and model-driven paradigm

During 2015–2017, seismic-property research largely remained within a physics- and model-driven paradigm, extending classical geophysical inversion with limited reliance on learning-based representations (Bui et al., 2017; Grana, 2016). Most studies cast the inversion of acoustic impedance, velocity, porosity, or fluid-related properties as constrained optimisation problems grounded in the wave equation or AVO theory. Objective functions typically combined a data-misfit term with regularisation promoting sparsity, smoothness, or spatial continuity (Gholami, 2016; Li and Peng, 2017; Kumar et al., 2016). 

> 25/45

Figure 12. The figure summarizes the technological evolution and paradigm shifts in property interpretation over the past decade, driven by advances in machine learning and deep learning. Using stage-specific keywords and representative milestones, it delineates the research focus of each phase and its central transitions. A central emphasis was the integration of rock-physics models to link elastic and petrophysical variables in a physically interpretable manner. Grana (2016) proposed a Bayesian linearised rock-physics inversion that provides an analytical solution under Gaussian priors, offering an efficient alternative to iterative nonlinear optimisation. Building on this idea, de Figueiredo et al. (2017) developed a joint Bayesian framework that simultaneously estimates acoustic impedance, porosity, and lithofacies by coupling rock-physics priors with post-stack seismic data, while facies-based inversion incorporated lithology and fluid classes as discrete prior states (Zabihi Naeini and Exley, 2017). Uncertainty quantification also gained traction. Stochastic approaches such as MCMC for nonlinear elastic-impedance inversion (Zhang et al., 2015) and geostatistical inversion that samples posterior petro-elastic properties (Bordignon et al., 2016; Carmo et al., 2017) moved beyond single deterministic solutions. Meanwhile, prior-model construction advanced through sedimentary-guided a priori models that embed seismic stratigraphy and depositional-pattern information, improving impedance inversion under sparse or biased well control (Zhao et al., 2016; Kieu and Kepic, 2015). Machine-learning techniques appeared only sporadically, mostly as shallow models, including support vector machines for lithology prediction (Sebtosheikh and Salehi, 2015), genetic-algorithm-optimised neural networks for porosity estimation (Kuroda et al., 2016), and neural-network mappings from seismic attributes to reservoir properties (Muradov and Shahtakhtinskiy, 2017). Hidden Markov models accounted for vertical lithological correlations (Feng et al., 2017), and Cao and Roy (2017) introduced machine learning for time-lapse property-change estimation, suggesting potential complementarity with physics-based 4D analysis. Overall, these applications remained isolated, and the dominant framework was still physics-driven inversion augmented by Bayesian and geostatistical uncertainty characterisation, forming the physical backbone for later data-driven advances. 

> 4.5.2 2018–2019: Early adoption of deep learning

From 2018 to 2019, seismic-property research began shifting from incremental refinements of classical inversion toward end-to-end deep-network approaches, marking the initial adoption of deep learning for subsurface property interpretation (Yang and Ma, 2019; Das et al., 2019; Biswas et al., 2019). Several studies showed that deep networks can learn direct mappings from seismic data to subsurface properties, reducing manual intervention and the computational cost of iterative inversion. For example, Yang and Ma (2019) introduced a deep-learning framework for velocity model building that bypasses conventional tomographic or FWI iterations, while CNN-based impedance inversion trained on synthetic seismograms demonstrated robustness to noise and generalisation across earth models (Das et al., 2019). Deep learning was also applied to lithology prediction (Zhang et al., 2018a), and sequence-oriented architectures such as RNNs and TCNs were used to regress impedance and other petrophysical properties from seismic traces by exploiting their sequential structure (Alfarraj and AlRegib, 2018; Mustafa et al., 2019). A more consequential change occurred in training paradigms, which expanded beyond purely supervised learning toward physics-guided and weakly supervised frameworks. Biswas et al. (2019) proposed a physics-guided CNN that embeds the convolutional forward model into training, enabling prestack and poststack inversion without relying exclusively on pointwise elastic-property labels. Physics-informed neural networks further incorporated wave-equation constraints directly into the loss, improving physical plausibility and reducing the need for large 

> 26/45

labelled datasets (Xu et al., 2019). Semi-supervised and adversarial strategies addressed label scarcity: Alfarraj and AlRegib (2019) used limited well-log supervision with learned forward operators and consistency constraints for impedance inversion, while GAN-based approaches were explored for rapid seismic-to-velocity mapping and data-driven velocity model building (Mosser et al., 2018; Araya-Polo et al., 2019). Meanwhile, physics-based and stochastic inversion continued to progress. Transdimensional MCMC was extended to quasi-3D impedance inversion with rigorous uncertainty quantification (Cho et al., 2018), and geostatistical inversion incorporated multiple uncertainty sources and was accelerated using distributed deep-learning frameworks (Pereira et al., 2019; Liu and Grana, 2019). Sparse-representation methods and ensemble learners provided additional alternatives for multi-parameter inversion and large-scale lithologic mapping (She et al., 2019; Kuhn et al., 2018). Overall, end-to-end deep inversion, physics-guided learning, and label-efficient strategies collectively established deep learning as a viable, and often superior, complement to classical iterative inversion (Pires de Lima et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2019). 

> 4.5.3 2020–2023: Deep-learning consolidation

Between 2020 and 2023, seismic-property research entered a consolidation stage of deep learning, with attribute modelling increasingly posed as an end-to-end mapping from seismic records to subsurface parameters such as impedance, velocity, porosity, and lithology (Li et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020c; Adler et al., 2021). Survey-style studies began to systematise neural-network inversion methods, suggesting that relatively stable technical and evaluation frameworks had emerged (Li et al., 2023a; Grana et al., 2022). CNN-based inversion remained dominant, evolving from fully convolutional residual networks with transfer learning to multi-parameter prestack inversion (Wu et al., 2020c; Das and Mukerji, 2020). Attention mechanisms and stronger temporal-modelling components, including TCNs, CNN–LSTM hybrids, and spatiotemporal modules, were introduced to capture nonlinear relationships and long-range dependencies along traces (Wei et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Mustafa et al., 2020), while residual attention further improved feature discrimination for impedance estimation (Wu et al., 2022b). Toward the later part of this period, Transformer and CNN–Transformer hybrids appeared, leveraging self-attention to model global context (Fu et al., 2023). Multi-task formulations that jointly recover multiple parameters using shared encoders or uncertainty-weighted losses improved stability and noise robustness relative to single-parameter regression (Wu et al., 2021b; Zhao et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a). In parallel, physics-guided closed-loop training advanced: network-predicted properties were passed through differentiable forward modelling to generate synthetic seismic data, and physics-consistency losses reduced reliance on dense labels (Sun et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021b). PINNs, which embed wave-equation constraints into training, gained traction for velocity and impedance inversion under few-shot or label-free settings (Zhu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023b). Domain-knowledge-guided frameworks incorporated rock-physics constraints and geological priors to improve physical plausibility, and physics-aware stochastic inversion combined neural surrogates with probabilistic sampling for uncertainty-aware inference (Zhang et al., 2023b; Su et al., 2023; Bürkle et al., 2023). Transfer learning and label-efficient training were widely adopted to address limited samples and survey variability (Wu et al., 2020c; Park and Sacchi, 2020). Semi-supervised and adversarial frameworks used sparse well-log supervision with consistency constraints or GAN-based learning to stabilise estimation under scarce labels (Wu et al., 2021c; Chen et al., 2022b), while cycle-consistent GAN variants exploited unlabelled data and domain-adaptation strategies reduced the synthetic-to-field gap for cross-domain prediction (Zhong et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022c). Weakly supervised multi-dimensional inversion enabled 1D well logs to supervise 2D/3D networks by masking losses outside well locations, reducing trace-by-trace discontinuities (Wu et al., 2021b). Additional efforts included autoencoder-based dimensionality reduction for large-scale inversion and RGT-constrained property interpretation to improve stratigraphic consistency (Gao et al., 2021b; Di et al., 2022). Uncertainty quantification received increasing, though still limited, attention, spanning Bayesian probabilistic inversion, uncertainty-propagation networks, and Monte Carlo dropout or ensembles within physics-guided training (Grana et al., 2022; Kolbjørnsen et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2021). Overall, progress covered architecture design, learning-paradigm innovation, and deeper integration of physical and geological constraints (Wang and Ma, 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b). Nevertheless, challenges persisted, including weakened structural features, limited cross-survey generalisation, strong dependence on well-log availability, and the lack of rigorous, calibrated uncertainty quantification for most deep-learning inversion methods. 

> 4.5.4 2024–2025: Foundation models and cross-survey generalization

In the 2024–2025 period, seismic-property inversion shifted toward cross-survey generalisation, generative modelling, and model universality (Li et al., 2024c; Dou et al., 2024b; Hosseinzadeh et al., 2025). Advances emphasised 

> 27/45

richer geological and physical priors, label-efficient learning under ultra-sparse well control, and multi-task joint-modelling. Most notably, foundation-model ideas emerged, aiming for unified, prompt-driven property interpretation cross-surveys. A major thread improved generalisation and geological plausibility by injecting explicit priors. New inversion targets with stronger rock-physics grounding, such as Poro-Acoustic Impedance (PAI), were proposed to better couple elastic responses with petrophysical meaning (Leisi et al., 2024). Wavelet-transform-based inversion addressed low-frequency deficiencies and improved thin-bed resolution (Fu et al., 2024). Other works compressed multi-attribute inputs via PCA for probabilistic porosity regression (Verma et al., 2025) or introduced stratigraphic positional encoding in Transformer models to enforce depositional ordering (Zhou et al., 2025). Physics-guided frameworks matured further, including probabilistic PINNs that combine rock-physics forward models with Bayesian inference (Li et al., 2024c), and model–data dual-driven networks that integrate physical constraints with data-driven learning for elastic and fracture-property inversion (Zhang et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2025). The transition from CNN-dominated local modelling to global self-attention accelerated. Hybrid Transformer– CNN architectures were developed for poststack impedance inversion and prestack multi-parameter estimation (Ning et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025), while self-attention-based 3D frameworks such as TransInver explicitly leveraged long-range spatial correlations beyond fully convolutional designs (Li et al., 2024d). Joint estimation of multiple parameters (e.g., impedance and porosity) within a single model further highlighted cross-parameter complementarity for improved identifiability (Sun et al., 2024). Label scarcity remained a central constraint. ContrasInver demonstrated contrastive semi-supervised inversion with as few as two wells (Dou et al., 2024b), and domain-adversarial semi-supervised frameworks extended 1D supervision to 2D/3D settings through feature alignment (Zou et al., 2024). Cycle-consistent GAN inversion continued to be refined for field applications (Fernandes et al., 2024b). Meanwhile, diffusion models emerged for impedance inversion, enabling stable training and principled uncertainty sampling without the mode-collapse issues typical of GANs (Liao and Cao, 2025; Song et al., 2024). Bayesian modelling also diversified, including normalising-flow-based posterior approximations and Bayesian 4D inversion for time-lapse characterisation, while GPU-accelerated stochastic MCMC indicated continued practicality of classical probabilistic methods (Arabpour et al., 2025; Kjønsberg et al., 2024; Moon et al., 2024). In parallel, prompt-driven and pretraining-based approaches began to explore unified modelling that treats seismic and well logs as conditional inputs, aiming at transfer across surveys and property types within a single representation (Dou et al., 2025; Sheng et al., 2025). 

> 4.5.5 Summary and outlook

At present, most machine-learning and AI-based studies on property interpretation remain highly focused on specific survey areas and specific target properties. The most common targets are impedance, velocity, and related attributes that are strongly linked to seismic reflections and admit relatively explicit physical mappings to reflection responses, which makes it easier to achieve strong performance on these quantities. Porosity occupies a middle ground: its physical relationship with acoustic impedance is well established through rock-physics models, but multi-factor coupling with lithology, fluid content, and pressure complicates purely data-driven prediction. In contrast, for properties that lack direct seismic-response mechanisms or are governed by stronger multi-factor coupling—such as gamma, lithology, and resistivity—data-driven methods often struggle to learn stable and transferable relationships. Their predictions are more susceptible to noise, non-uniqueness, and inter-survey variability, leading to particularly limited generalisation. Property interpretation also exhibits clear survey specialisation in practice (Zhang et al., 2023b; Wu et al., 2021b). Models are typically trained on well and seismic data from a single area and are primarily intended for that same deployment context. Cross-survey transfer often requires retraining or introducing complex adaptation strategies (Meng et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2020). Moreover, in structurally complex settings with dense faulting, intense folding, or rapid stratigraphic variations, purely local data fitting is often insufficient to ensure spatial continuity and geological plausibility (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021b; Di et al., 2022). Practical applications therefore frequently require additional strong constraints—such as structural frameworks, stratigraphic consistency, or facies control—to obtain property volumes that better satisfy interpretation needs (Sun et al., 2021; Grana et al., 2022; Kolbjørnsen et al., 2020). More recently, prompt-driven and foundation-model approaches have begun to reshape this landscape (Dou et al., 2025; Sheng et al., 2025). By training on broader data distributions, such models can, at inference time, take seismic data together with well constraints or related conditional information as inputs and directly output the corresponding property model, enabling a more end-to-end prediction workflow. This strategy reduces error accumulation arising from multi-stage coupling in conventional pipelines and provides a scalable starting point for unified modelling cross-survey areas and properties, although large-scale field validation remains at an early stage. 

> 28/45

An important dimension of property-interpretation research is the distinction between poststack (acoustic impedance, porosity from AI) and prestack (elastic parameters, multi-parameter joint estimation) formulations. Throughout 2015–2025, poststack inversion often served as the initial testbed for new deep-learning architectures, owing to its lower dimensionality, simpler physics, and wider data availability, before methods were extended to prestack settings. Prestack inversion, which recovers richer elastic information (Vp, Vs, density), was more closely tied to rock-physics integration and physics-guided frameworks. Velocity model building constituted a third, largely independent thread with its own data requirements and evaluation protocols; it experienced a particularly concentrated growth during 2018–2019 (Yang and Ma, 2019; Mosser et al., 2018; Araya-Polo et al., 2019), followed by steady development through physics-informed and differentiable-programming approaches. Looking forward, several directions are likely to continue advancing. Stronger explicit constraints on complex structure and spatial consistency are needed to improve the geometric and semantic reliability of predictions. More systematic treatment of non-uniqueness and uncertainty is required—diffusion models, which emerged in 2024–2025 for impedance inversion (Liao and Cao, 2025; Song et al., 2024), offer a principled generative framework for posterior sampling that may complement or supersede GAN-based approaches. Foundation models operating on raw seismic inputs may further blur the traditional boundaries between poststack, prestack, and velocity inversion without explicit data-type distinctions. Validation under larger-scale and more representative 3D benchmarks and evaluation protocols is essential to rigorously assess cross-survey generalisation and to drive property modelling from survey-specific solutions toward a more general and transferable unified paradigm. 

> 4.5.6 CIG-Bench-Property results

Figure 13. Results of the CIG-Bench-Property model. The model adopts a promptable conditional training strategy (Dou et al., 2025), with seismic data and well logs used as inputs. (a) Netherlands F3 seismic data. (b) Acoustic impedance property modeling result. (c) Gamma-ray property modeling result. (d) Lithology property modeling result. (e) Sonic property modeling result. (f) Vp property modeling result. The property predictor follows a promptable conditional paradigm: it takes a seismic volume together with a sparse well-log property volume (zeros where no well is present) and outputs a dense 3D property volume. Internally it stacks three channels — seismic, sparse property, and a binary well mask — and feeds them to the HRNet backbone. The number and location of wells are not fixed: passing more wells generally improves accuracy, as quantified in Table 1(e) (reported in Section 4.5.8).                          

> 1import numpy as np
> 2from cig_bench.predictor. property import PropertyPredictor
> 34prop_predictor =PropertyPredictor(device="cuda")
> 5vp_vol, used, wells =prop_predictor.predict(
> 6seis, vp_log,
> 7infer_shape=(640, 512, 512),
> 8)
> 29/45 9prop_predictor.visualize(used, vp_vol, wells)

As shown in Figure 13, the CIG-Bench-Property model can directly generate multiple subsurface property volumes from seismic data and sparse well-log constraints under a unified conditional training strategy. The predicted properties show strong spatial consistency with seismic reflection patterns, indicating that the model can effectively use seismic structural information to guide property propagation between wells. The results preserve laterally continuous stratigraphic trends while highlighting clear vertical and lateral property variations across different geological units. Although the well-log inputs are spatially sparse, the model produces coherent three-dimensional property distributions over the whole seismic volume, suggesting its ability to transfer quantitative well information into geologically reasonable subsurface property models. These results demonstrate the potential of a unified, promptable strategy for seismic and well-log driven property modeling. 

> 4.5.7 Training and evaluation setup

The rationale for using synthetic data for quantitative comparison and for releasing lightweight, single-task baselines is discussed in Section 4.1. We focus here on the implementation details. All CIG-Bench baselines reported in this section are trained on the synthetic CIG-Bench training set described in Section 3 (or, for tasks that re-use earlier CIG datasets, on the corresponding training partitions of those datasets) and evaluated on held-out synthetic test volumes drawn from the same generation pipeline but never seen during training. Unless stated otherwise, all models are trained with the Adam optimizer on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU; per-task hyperparameters (learning-rate schedule, batch size, training iterations, patch size, and augmentation) are released together with the code and configuration files in the CIG-Bench repository to ensure full reproducibility. For the external baselines (FaultSegv1, FaultNet, FaultSegv2, FaultSSL, DeepRGT, ChannelSeg, KarstSeg), we use the authors’ publicly released checkpoints and re-evaluate them on the CIG-Bench test sets under a unified preprocessing and metric implementation, so that the reported numbers reflect methodological differences rather than discrepancies introduced by inconsistent preprocessing, sampling strategies, or metric implementations. All metrics are computed at the volume level on the same test split per task, using a single-seed model; we do not currently report multi-seed variance or formal significance tests, and the reported numbers are intended as a reproducible reference rather than as a definitive performance upper bound. 

> 4.5.8 Quantitative comparison on CIG-Bench

The metric set is tailored to the geometric or volumetric nature of each task. Fault segmentation is evaluated with the voxel-level intersection-over-union, IoU = |P ∩ G|/|P ∪ G|, together with the boundary-aware HD 95 (the 95 th percentile of the symmetric Hausdorff distance between predicted and reference boundary point sets (Huttenlocher et al., 1993)) and the ODS/OIS contour-detection scores (Arbeláez et al., 2011), all computed on 2D inline/crossline sections. Channel and karst segmentation use IoU together with precision and recall. RGT estimation reports volumetric SSIM (Wang et al., 2004), PSNR, and MAE on the RGT field itself, while HD 95 , ODS, and OIS are computed on equally spaced iso-contours extracted from 2D RGT sections , so that horizon-level geometric accuracy is assessed under a unified protocol. Property modelling reports MAE, SSIM, PSNR, and the coefficient of determination R2 = 1 − P

> i

(yi − ˆyi)2/ P

> i

(yi − ¯y)2 on the recovered volume, with LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018b) on 2D sections to capture perceptual fidelity. All metrics are reported as single-seed estimates without multi-seed variance. Table 1 reports the quantitative comparison of representative methods on the CIG-Bench test sets across five seismic interpretation tasks: fault segmentation, RGT estimation, channel segmentation, karst segmentation, and property modelling. Rather than enumerating individual numbers, we summarize the readings that the table is designed to support. For fault segmentation (Table 1a), the CIG-Bench baseline already surpasses the four widely used open-source models (FaultSegv1 (Wu et al., 2019a), FaultNet (Dou et al., 2022b), FaultSegv2 (Li et al., 2024a), FaultSSL (Dou et al., 2024a)) across all four metrics, and the skip-connection variant is best overall. The most pronounced gain is on the boundary-aware HD95, which drops by roughly two thirds relative to FaultSegv1, indicating improvements not only in region overlap but also in boundary localization. For RGT estimation (Table 1b), DeepRGT (Bi et al., 2021) and the CIG-Bench baseline recover the volumetric RGT field with comparable voxel-wise fidelity (similar PSNR and MAE), but the CIG-Bench baseline produces substantially sharper horizon-level geometry, halving HD95 and improving ODS/OIS on extracted iso-contours. For geobody segmentation (Tables 1c,d), the CIG-Bench baseline improves IoU and precision over ChannelSeg (Gao et al., 2021a, 2020) on channels and over KarstSeg (Wu et al., 2020b; Yan et al., 2025) on karst caves. The slightly lower karst recall reflects a more conservative prediction strategy, which is generally preferable in practice where weak boundaries and morphological ambiguity make false positives costly. 

> 30/45

Table 1. Quantitative comparison on the CIG-Bench benchmark across five seismic interpretation tasks. ↑ indicates higher is better, ↓ indicates lower is better. Best results are in bold .

(a) Fault segmentation 

Method IOU ↑ HD95 (2D) ↓ ODS (2D) ↑ OIS (2D) ↑

FaultSegv1 0.5926 16.3122 0.7372 0.7647 FaultNet 0.6465 13.1779 0.7600 0.7898 FaultSegv2 0.6675 11.3397 0.7811 0.8004 FaultSSL 0.6899 11.0879 0.7689 0.7950 CIG-Bench (ours) 0.7234 7.6465 0.7859 0.8083 

CIG-Bench (skip connect) 0.7455 5.2223 0.7865 0.8133                         

> (b) RGT estimation (stratigraphic sequence)
> Method SSIM ↑PSNR ↑MAE ↓HD95 (horizon, 2D) ↓ODS (horizon, 2D) ↑OIS (horizon, 2D) ↑
> DeepRGT 0.9801 38.89 0.01557 8.6612 0.7754 0.8031
> CIG-Bench (ours) 0.9855 38.67 0.01866 4.7321 0.8306 0.8512

(c) Channel segmentation 

Method IOU ↑ Precision ↑ Recall ↑

ChannelSeg 0.8075 0.8701 0.9173 

CIG-Bench (ours) 0.8566 0.9202 0.9253 (d) Karst segmentation 

Method IOU ↑ Precision ↑ Recall ↑

KarstSeg 0.8607 0.9101 0.9395 CIG-Bench (ours) 0.8783 0.9502 0.9214 

(e) Property modelling (CIG-Bench, varying number of well logs) 

# Well logs MAE ↓ SSIM ↑ LPIPS (2D) ↓ PSNR ↑ R2 ↑

4 logs 0.1298 0.8455 0.1633 25.66 0.7531 9 logs 0.1055 0.8891 0.1463 27.19 0.8121 16 logs 0.0868 0.9021 0.1222 27.97 0.8531 

25 logs 0.0706 0.9347 0.1079 29.55 0.8616 

> 31/45

For property modelling (Table 1e), all five metrics improve monotonically as the number of conditioning well logs increases from 4 to 25, confirming that the promptable conditional baseline effectively leverages additional well constraints and provides a controllable reference for evaluating inversion methods under different levels of well supervision. These readings should be interpreted in light of the scope clarified in Section 4.1: the metrics measure relative ranking and the methodological upper bound on held-out synthetic data, not field performance, and are intended as a reproducible reference rather than a definitive performance ceiling. 

# 5 Limitations 

Beyond the field-wide challenges discussed in Section 1.1, this work has several limitations of its own that we state explicitly. First, the bibliometric analysis relies on Crossref metadata, whose coverage is not exhaustive, so the citation-network view in Figure 3 should be read as an approximate, in-corpus snapshot of inter-task knowledge flow rather than an exact measurement. Second, the quantitative CIG-Bench results are reported on synthetic data, for the reasons discussed in Section 4.1. The reported metrics thus characterize the methodological upper bound and the relative ranking among methods on held-out data from the same distribution, rather than directly estimating field performance; generalization to real surveys is supported only qualitatively. Third, the CIG-Bench baselines are deliberately lightweight, single-task models intended as reproducible reference points rather than state-of-the-art methods (Section 4.1). They are not benchmarked head-to-head against large foundation models, since the scale and heterogeneous, often undisclosed pretraining data of such models make fair and reproducible comparison difficult. Fourth, task and geobody coverage is not exhaustive: the current benchmark spans a representative but limited subset of interpretation tasks and target types, and some categories are reviewed without being provided as unified baselines. Finally, several methods and datasets evaluated or re-used by CIG-Bench were developed by the authors or members of their research group. To mitigate the resulting bias, all baselines are evaluated under identical preprocessing, data splits, and metric implementations, and the curated literature metadata and citation matrix are released so that the analysis can be independently reproduced or revised. 

# 6 Outlook 

Building on the task-wise discussions above, we close with a cross-task perspective on where the field is heading. The challenges identified in Section 1.1—interpretation under complex geological conditions, cross-survey semantic generalization, and benchmark construction—remain the durable bottlenecks, and the most promising directions are those that address them regardless of which modeling paradigm ultimately prevails. Two directions are likely to matter across all four task categories. The first is the deeper integration of physical and geological priors—fault geometry and displacement constraints, stratigraphic topology, rock-physics relationships, and wave-equation or imaging-operator constraints—directly into network architectures and training objectives, so that predictions remain geologically plausible and more transferable in the complex settings where purely data-driven models tend to fail. The second is the treatment of uncertainty as a first-class output rather than an afterthought: because subsurface interpretation is fundamentally ill-posed, calibrated uncertainty from generative, ensemble, or Bayesian approaches is essential for reliable downstream decisions. Evaluation itself remains an open problem. Because the field lacks an objective ground truth (Section 5), progress depends on neutral, reproducible benchmarks with unified task definitions, splits, and uncertainty-aware metrics, of which CIG-Bench is intended as one step. Finally, foundation models and prompt-driven interaction have attracted growing attention, and self-supervised pretraining on large seismic corpora is a promising route to transferable representations. Whether this momentum constitutes a lasting paradigm shift remains to be seen, since much of the current activity is transferred from the success of such models in other fields and still requires validation through longer-term practice. Looking further ahead, LLM-based autonomous agents are beginning to orchestrate interpretation workflows, translating natural-language goals into concrete geophysical operations and chaining specialized tools under human oversight (Kanfar et al., 2025; Ren et al., 2025); such systems could in principle coordinate the four task categories reviewed here while keeping the interpreter in the loop, although this direction is still highly exploratory and its reliability and geological soundness 

> 32/45

are yet to be established. In all these scenarios, reproducible benchmarks remain indispensable as the standardized measuring stick for judging whether any paradigm delivers genuine and transferable improvement. 

# 7 Conclusion 

This article systematically examines 652 publications from the past decade, organized into four major task categories: structural interpretation, geobody identification, seismic facies analysis, and property estimation. Across all four, we trace how a decade of deep learning has shifted the field from fragmented, task-specific models toward unified and transferable frameworks, while highlighting that subsurface interpretation remains fundamentally different from other AI-driven imaging tasks: signals are blurry and non-unique, semantics are sparse, and densely reliable annotations are essentially unobtainable. Deep learning has fundamentally reshaped subsurface interpretation since 2018, driven by the convergence of scalable synthetic data, encoder–decoder architectures, and physics-guided training. Fault interpretation has progressed furthest toward deployment, yet persistent challenges remain in low-SNR intervals, complex tectonic styles, and cross-survey generalization. For other categories, the gap between research and operational reliability is substantially wider, constrained by label scarcity, semantic ambiguity, and the intrinsic non-uniqueness of seismic imaging. To consolidate these efforts, we introduce CIG-Bench, providing baseline models and inference results for fault segmentation, RGT estimation, geobody segmentation, and property modeling under a unified framework, establishing a reproducible reference for method development and fair comparison. The open challenges and future directions distilled from this survey are discussed in Section 6. We hope that this review, together with the CIG-Bench benchmark, helps move subsurface imaging interpretation from experience-driven practice toward a more systematic and reproducible discipline. 

# References 

S. Mostafa Mousavi and Gregory C. Beroza. Deep-learning seismology. Science , 377(6607), 2022. doi: 10.1126/ science.abm4470. Siwei Yu and Jianwei Ma. Deep learning for geophysics: Current and future trends. Reviews of Geophysics , 59(3), 2021. doi: 10.1029/2021rg000742. Karianne J. Bergen, et al. Machine learning for data-driven discovery in solid earth geoscience. Science , 363(6433), 2019. doi: 10.1126/science.aau0323. Dario Grana. Bayesian linearized rock-physics inversion. Geophysics , 81(6):D625–D641, 2016. doi: 10.1190/ geo2016-0161.1. Ziheng Sun, et al. A review of earth artificial intelligence. Computers & Geosciences , 159:105034, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2022.105034. Zhen Wang, et al. Successful leveraging of image processing and machine learning in seismic structural interpretation: A review. The Leading Edge , 37(6):451–461, 2018. doi: 10.1190/tle37060451.1. Farbod Khosro Anjom, et al. Machine learning for seismic exploration: Where are we and how far are we from the holy grail? Geophysics , 89(1):WA157–WA178, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0129.1. Xinming Wu, et al. Faultseg3d: Using synthetic data sets to train an end-to-end convolutional neural network for 3d seismic fault segmentation. Geophysics , 84(3):IM35–IM45, 2019a. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0646.1. Wei Xiong, et al. Seismic fault detection with convolutional neural network. Geophysics , 83(5):O97–O103, 2018. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0666.1. Hao Wu, et al. Semiautomated seismic horizon interpretation using the encoder-decoder convolutional neural network. 

Geophysics , 84(6):B403–B417, 2019b. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0672.1. Zhicheng Geng, et al. Deep learning for relative geologic time and seismic horizons. Geophysics , 85(4):WA87–WA100, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0252.1. Yazeed Alaudah, et al. A machine-learning benchmark for facies classification. Interpretation , 7(3):SE175–SE187, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0249.1. Feng Qian, et al. Unsupervised seismic facies analysis via deep convolutional autoencoders. Geophysics , 83(3): A39–A43, 2018. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0524.1. Fangshu Yang and Jianwei Ma. Deep-learning inversion: A next-generation seismic velocity model building method. 

Geophysics , 84(4):R583–R599, 2019. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0249.1. Vishal Das, et al. Convolutional neural network for seismic impedance inversion. Geophysics , 84(6):R869–R880, 2019. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0838.1. 

> 33/45

S. Mostafa Mousavi, et al. Applications of deep neural networks in exploration seismology: A technical survey. 

Geophysics , 89(1):WA95–WA115, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0063.1. Reetam Biswas, et al. Prestack and poststack inversion using a physics-guided convolutional neural network. 

Interpretation , 7(3):SE161–SE174, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0236.1. Jian Sun, et al. Physics-guided deep learning for seismic inversion with hybrid training and uncertainty analysis. 

Geophysics , 86(3):R303–R317, 2021. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0312.1. Shucai Li, et al. Deep-learning inversion of seismic data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 58 (3):2135–2149, 2020. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2019.2953473. Augusto Cunha, et al. Seismic fault detection in real data using transfer learning from a convolutional neural network pre-trained with synthetic seismic data. Computers & Geosciences , 135:104344, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j. cageo.2019.104344. Zhe Yan, et al. Improving performance of seismic fault detection by fine-tuning the convolutional neural network pre-trained with synthetic samples. Energies , 14(12):3650, 2021. doi: 10.3390/en14123650. Xintao Chai, et al. An open-source package for deep-learning-based seismic facies classification: Benchmarking experiments on the seg 2020 open data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–19, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3144666. Xinming Wu, et al. Sensing prior constraints in deep neural networks for solving exploration geophysical problems. In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , volume 120. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2023. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2219573120. Xinming Wu, et al. Faultnet3d: Predicting fault probabilities, strikes, and dips with a single convolutional neural network. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 57(11):9138–9155, 2019c. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2019. 2925003. Yu An, et al. Current state and future directions for deep learning based automatic seismic fault interpretation: A systematic review. Earth-Science Reviews , 243:104509, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2023.104509. You Li, et al. Faultseg3d plus: A comprehensive study on evaluating and improving cnn-based seismic fault segmentation. Geophysics , 89(5):N77–N91, 2024a. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0778.1. Yimin Dou, et al. Geological everything model 3d: a promptable foundation model for unified and zero-shot subsurface understanding. preprint , 2025. doi: doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.00419. Runhai Feng, et al. Uncertainty quantification in fault detection using convolutional neural networks. Geophysics ,86(3):M41–M48, 2021a. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0424.1. Yu An, et al. Deep convolutional neural network for automatic fault recognition from 3d seismic datasets. Computers & Geosciences , 153:104776, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2021.104776. Yimin Dou, et al. Faultssl: Seismic fault detection via semisupervised learning. Geophysics , 89(3):M79–M91, 2024a. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0550.1. Amir Adler, et al. Deep learning for seismic inverse problems: Toward the acceleration of geophysical analysis workflows. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 38(2):89–119, 2021. doi: 10.1109/msp.2020.3037429. Zhengfa Bi, et al. Deep relative geologic time: A deep learning method for simultaneously interpreting 3-d seismic horizons and faults. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth , 126(9), 2021. doi: 10.1029/2021jb021882. Anders U. Waldeland, et al. Convolutional neural networks for automated seismic interpretation. The Leading Edge ,37(7):529–537, 2018. doi: 10.1190/tle37070529.1. Yunzhi Shi, et al. Saltseg: Automatic 3d salt segmentation using a deep convolutional neural network. Interpretation ,7(3):SE113–SE122, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0235.1. Xinming Wu. Methods to compute salt likelihoods and extract salt boundaries from 3d seismic images. Geophysics ,81(6):IM119–IM126, 2016. doi: 10.1190/geo2016-0250.1. Zhen Wang, et al. Noise-robust detection and tracking of salt domes in postmigrated volumes using texture, tensors, and subspace learning. Geophysics , 80(6):WD101–WD116, 2015a. doi: 10.1190/geo2015-0116.1. Mustafa Alfarhan, et al. Robust concurrent detection of salt domes and faults in seismic surveys using an improved unet architecture. IEEE Access , 10:39424–39435, 2022. doi: 10.1109/access.2020.3043973. M. Quamer Nasim, et al. Seismic facies analysis: A deep domain adaptation approach. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–16, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3151883. Dario Grana, et al. Probabilistic inversion of seismic data for reservoir petrophysical characterization: Review and examples. Geophysics , 87(5):M199–M216, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0776.1. Ming Li, et al. A comprehensive review of seismic inversion based on neural networks. Earth Science Informatics , 16 (4):2991–3021, 2023a. doi: 10.1007/s12145-023-01079-4. Hanlin Sheng, et al. Seismic foundation model: A next generation deep-learning model in geophysics. Geophysics ,

> 34/45

90(2):IM59–IM79, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2024-0262.1. Hang Gao, et al. A foundation model enpowered by a multi-modal prompt engine for universal seismic geobody interpretation across surveys. Information Fusion , 125:103437, 2026. doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2025.103437. Haoran Zhang, et al. Automatic seismic facies interpretation using supervised deep learning. Geophysics , 86(1): IM15–IM33, 2021a. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0425.1. Yimin Dou, et al. Attention-based 3-d seismic fault segmentation training by a few 2-d slice labels. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–15, 2022a. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2021.3113676. Yimin Dou, et al. Md loss: Efficient training of 3-d seismic fault segmentation network under sparse labels by weakening anomaly annotation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–14, 2022b. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3196810. Hui Gao, et al. cigfacies: a massive-scale benchmark dataset of seismic facies and its application. Earth System Science Data , 17(2):595–609, 2025. doi: 10.5194/essd-17-595-2025. Guangyu Wang, et al. cigchannel: a large-scale 3d seismic dataset with labeled paleochannels for advancing deep learning in seismic interpretation. Earth System Science Data , 17(7):3447–3471, 2025. doi: 10.5194/ essd-17-3447-2025. Guoqiang Xu and Bilal U. Haq. Seismic facies analysis: Past, present and future. Earth-Science Reviews , 224:103876, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2021.103876. Muhammad Saif Ul Islam and Aamir Wali. A comprehensive review of deep learning techniques for salt dome segmentation in seismic images. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 230:105504, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2024. 105504. JingYi Wang, et al. Deep artificial neural network in seismic inversion. Progress in Geophysics , 38(1):298–320, 2023a. doi: 10.6038/pg2023FF0467. Lei Lin, et al. Machine learning for subsurface geological feature identification from seismic data: Methods, datasets, challenges, and opportunities. Earth-Science Reviews , 257:104887, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2024.104887. Xinming Wu, et al. Building realistic structure models to train convolutional neural networks for seismic structural interpretation. Geophysics , 85(4):WA27–WA39, 2020a. Xinming Wu, et al. Deep learning for characterizing paleokarst collapse features in 3-d seismic images. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth , 125(9):e2020JB019685, 2020b. Sima Shakiba, et al. Fault and non-fault areas detection based on seismic data through min/max autocorrelation factors and fuzzy classification. Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering , 26:51–60, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j. jngse.2015.05.024. Rajesh Rekapalli, et al. Fault identification by diffraction separation from seismic reflection data using time slice ssa-based algorithm. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2016 , pages 3920–3924. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2016. doi: 10.1190/segam2016-13531274.1. Abdulmajid Lawal, et al. Fault detection using seismic attributes and visual saliency. In SEG Techni-cal Program Expanded Abstracts 2016 , pages 1939–1943. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2016. doi: 10.1190/segam2016-13952600.1. Frantz Maerten and Laurent Maerten. On a method for reducing interpretation uncertainty of poorly imaged seismic horizons and faults using geomechanically based restoration technique. Interpretation , 3(4):SAA105–SAA116, 2015. doi: 10.1190/int-2015-0009.1. Gabriel Godefroy, et al. Seismic interpretation of fault-related deformation using a numerical kinematic model. In 

SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2016 , pages 1981–1986. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2016. doi: 10.1190/segam2016-13880830.1. Ke Wang, et al. 3d seismic horizon extraction with horizon patch constraints. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2015 , pages 1754–1758. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2015b. doi: 10.1190/segam2015-5877422.1. Donald A. Herron. Pitfalls in horizon autopicking. Interpretation , 3(1):SB1–SB4, 2015. doi: 10.1190/int-2014-0062.1. Emmanuel Labrunye and Camille Carn. Merging chronostratigraphic modeling and global horizon tracking. 

Interpretation , 3(2):SN59–SN67, 2015. doi: 10.1190/int-2014-0130.1. Mauricio Araya-Polo, et al. Automated fault detection without seismic processing. The Leading Edge , 36(3):208–214, 2017. doi: 10.1190/tle36030208.1. Xinming Wu. Directional structure-tensor-based coherence to detect seismic faults and channels. Geophysics , 82(2): A 13–A 17, 2017. doi: 10.1190/geo2016-0473.1. Haibin Di and Dengliang Gao. 3d seismic flexure analysis for subsurface fault detection and fracture characterization. 

Pure and Applied Geophysics , 174(3):747–761, 2017a. doi: 10.1007/s00024-016-1406-9. Ismot Jahan, et al. Fault detection using principal component analysis of seismic attributes in the bakken formation, 

> 35/45

williston basin, north dakota, usa. Interpretation , 5(3):T361–T372, 2017. doi: 10.1190/int-2016-0209.1. Audun Libak, et al. Fault visualization and identification in fault seismic attribute volumes: Implications for fault geometric characterization. Interpretation , 5(2):B1–B16, 2017. doi: 10.1190/int-2016-0152.1. Antoine Guitton, et al. Statistical imaging of faults in 3d seismic volumes using a machine learning approach. In 

SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2017 , pages 2045–2049. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2017. doi: 10.1190/segam2017-17589633.1. Xinming Wu, et al. Convolutional neural networks for fault interpretation in seismic images. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 , pages 1946–1950. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/ segam2018-2995341.1. H. Di, et al. Seismic fault detection from post-stack amplitude by convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings .EAGE Publications BV, 2018a. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201800733. Ping Lu, et al. Using generative adversarial networks to improve deep-learning fault interpretation networks. The Leading Edge , 37(8):578–583, 2018. doi: 10.1190/tle37080578.1. Tao Zhao and Pradip Mukhopadhyay. A fault-detection workflow using deep learning and image processing. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 , pages 1966–1970. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2997005.1. Bowen Guo, et al. A new method for automatic seismic fault detection using convolutional neural network. In 

SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 . Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/ segam2018-2995894.1. Yue Ma, et al. A deep-learning method for automatic fault detection. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 , pages 1941–1945. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2984932.1. Yihuai Lou and Bo Zhang. Automatic horizon picking using multiple seismic attributes. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 . Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2997698.1. A. J. Bugge, et al. Automatic facies classification and horizon tracking in 3d seismic data. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2018. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201803010. Axelle Pochet, et al. Seismic fault detection using convolutional neural networks trained on synthetic poststacked amplitude maps. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 16(3):352–356, 2019. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2018. 2875836. Naihao Liu, et al. Common-azimuth seismic data fault analysis using residual unet. Interpretation , 8(3):SM25–SM37, 2020a. doi: 10.1190/int-2019-0173.1. Xinming Wu, et al. Multitask learning for local seismic image processing: fault detection, structure-oriented smoothing with edge-preserving, and seismic normal estimation by using a single convolutional neural network. 

Geophysical Journal International , 219(3):2097–2109, 2019d. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggz418. Dun Yang, et al. Seismic fault detection based on 3d unet++ model. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1631–1635. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3426516.1. Haibin Di, et al. Improving seismic fault detection by super-attribute-based classification. Interpretation , 7(3): SE251–SE267, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0188.1. Zhining Liu, et al. Interpretability-guided convolutional neural networks for seismic fault segmentation. In ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 4312–4316. IEEE, 2020b. doi: 10.1109/icassp40776.2020.9053472. Valentin Tschannen, et al. Extracting horizon surfaces from 3d seismic data using deep learning. Geophysics , 85(3): N17–N26, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0569.1. Bas Peters, et al. Multiresolution neural networks for tracking seismic horizons from few training images. Interpreta-tion , 7(3):SE201–SE213, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0225.1. Yunzhi Shi, et al. Waveform embedding: Automatic horizon picking with unsupervised deep learning. Geophysics ,85(4):WA67–WA76, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0438.1. Haibin Di, et al. Seismic stratigraphy interpretation by deep convolutional neural networks: A semisupervised workflow. Geophysics , 85(4):WA77–WA86, 2020a. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0433.1. Haibin Di, et al. Accelerating seismic fault and stratigraphy interpretation with deep cnns: A case study of the taranaki basin, new zealand. The Leading Edge , 39(10):727–733, 2020b. doi: 10.1190/tle39100727.1. Ali Siahkoohi, et al. Uncertainty quantification in imaging and automatic horizon tracking – a bayesian deep-prior based approach. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1636–1640. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3417560.1. Yongchae Cho, et al. Semi-auto horizon tracking guided by strata histograms generated with transdimensional markov-chain monte carlo. Geophysical Prospecting , 68(5):1456–1475, 2020. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.12933. 

> 36/45

Sébastien Guillon, et al. Ground-truth uncertainty-aware metrics for machine learning applications on seismic image interpretation: Application to faults and horizon extraction. The Leading Edge , 39(10):734–741, 2020. doi: 10.1190/tle39100734.1. Kai Gao, et al. Automatic fault detection on seismic images using a multiscale attention convolutional neural network. Geophysics , 87(1):N13–N29, 2022a. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0945.1. Xiao-Li Wei, et al. Seismic fault detection using convolutional neural networks with focal loss. Computers & Geosciences , 158:104968, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2021.104968. Jizhong Wu, et al. Fault detection based on fully convolutional networks (fcn). Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , 9(3):259, 2021a. doi: 10.3390/jmse9030259. Kai Gao, et al. Fault detection on seismic structural images using a nested residual u-net. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–15, 2022b. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2021.3073840. Lei Lin, et al. Automatic geologic fault identification from seismic data using 2.5d channel attention u-net. Geophysics ,87(4):IM111–IM124, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0805.1. Zhanxin Tang, et al. Fault detection via 2.5d transformer u-net with seismic data pre-processing. Remote Sensing ,15(4):1039, 2023. doi: 10.3390/rs15041039. Zhiwei Wang, et al. Transformer assisted dual u-net for seismic fault detection. Frontiers in Earth Science , 11, 2023b. doi: 10.3389/feart.2023.1047626. Xiao Ma, et al. 3-d seismic fault detection using recurrent convolutional neural networks with compound loss. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 61:1–15, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3275951. Xiao Li, et al. Fault-seg-net: A method for seismic fault segmentation based on multi-scale feature fusion with imbalanced classification. Computers and Geotechnics , 158:105412, 2023b. doi: 10.1016/j.compgeo.2023.105412. Zirui Wang, et al. Distilling knowledge from an ensemble of convolutional neural networks for seismic fault detection. 

IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 19:1–5, 2022a. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2020.3034960. Shenghou Wang, et al. Structural augmentation in seismic data for fault prediction. Applied Sciences , 12(19):9796, 2022b. doi: 10.3390/app12199796. Ruoshui Zhou, et al. Learning from unlabelled real seismic data: Fault detection based on transfer learning. 

Geophysical Prospecting , 69(6):1218–1234, 2021. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.13097. Jiankun Jing, et al. Fault detection using a convolutional neural network trained with point-spread function-convolution-based samples. Geophysics , 88(1):IM1–IM14, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0824.1. Haibin Di, et al. Imposing interpretational constraints on a seismic interpretation convolutional neural network. 

Geophysics , 86(3):IM63–IM71, 2021a. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0449.1. Donglin Zhu, et al. 3d fault detection: Using human reasoning to improve performance of convolutional neural networks. Geophysics , 87(4):IM143–IM156, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0905.1. Jiarun Yang, et al. A multi-task learning method for relative geologic time, horizons, and faults with prior information and transformer. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 61:1–20, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3264593. Hao Wu, et al. Variable seismic waveforms representation: Weak-supervised learning based seismic horizon picking. 

Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering , 214:110412, 2022a. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2022.110412. Yiliang Luo, et al. Sequence-constrained multitask horizon tracking. Geophysics , 88(2):IM15–IM27, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0398.1. Zeren Zhang, et al. Improving seismic fault recognition with self-supervised pre-training: A study of 3d transformer-based with multi-scale decoding and fusion. Remote Sensing , 16(5):922, 2024. doi: 10.3390/rs16050922. Yimin Dou and Kewen Li. 3d seismic fault detection via contrastive-reconstruction representation learning. Expert Systems with Applications , 249:123617, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2024.123617. Enning Wang, et al. 3d pre-trained transformers for seismic fault detection, image denoising and dense horizon inter-pretation. In Fourth International Meeting for Applied Geoscience & Energy , pages 612–616. Society of Exploration Geophysicists and American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 2024a. doi: 10.1190/image2024-4093532.1. Ran Chen, et al. Seismic fault sam: Adapting sam with lightweight modules and 2.5d strategy for fault detection. In 2024 IEEE 17th International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP) , pages 436–441. IEEE, 2024. doi: 10.1109/icsp62129.2024.10846297. Zhanxin Tang, et al. Fault3dnnet: A lightweight 3d seismic fault detection network with bidirectional decoding. 

Geophysics , 89(6):IM91–IM103, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0712.1. Xiao Li, et al. Fault-seg-lnet: A method for seismic fault identification based on lightweight and dynamic scalable network. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , 127:107316, 2024b. doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2023. 107316. 

> 37/45

Jing Yang, et al. Multiurnet for 3d seismic fault attributes fusion detection combined with pca. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 221:105296, 2024a. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2024.105296. Tong Zhou, et al. Fault transformer: An automatic fault detection algorithm on seismic images using a transformer enhanced neural network. Interpretation , 12(3):SE55–SE64, 2024. doi: 10.1190/int-2023-0120.1. Xiaofang Liao, et al. Automatic 3d horizon picking using a volumetric transformer-based segmentation network. 

Journal of Applied Geophysics , 236:105673, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2025.105673. Zhaoyang Zhao and Jian-guo Zhao. Seismic horizon tracking based on the transunet model. Geophysics , 90(2): IM1–IM13, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0626.1. Zheng Zhang, et al. 3-d seismic fault detection using fault orthogonal annotation and barely supervised learning. 

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 63:1–11, 2025a. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2025.3531493. Zhiying Liao, et al. A deep learning-based seismic horizon tracking method with uncertainty encoding and vertical constraint. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–13, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024. 3424467. Yonggwon Jung, et al. Machine-learning-driven semiauto multiscenario horizon interpretation with uncertainty quantification. Geophysics , 90(2):IM47–IM58, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2024-0241.1. Fu Wang, et al. Stratal surfaces honoring seismic structures and interpreted geologic time surfaces. Geophysics , 89 (2):N45–N57, 2024b. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0432.1. Fabrice Taty Moukati, et al. From fault likelihood to fault networks: Stochastic seismic interpretation through a marked point process with interactions. Mathematical Geosciences , 57(1):115–151, 2025. doi: 10.1007/ s11004-024-10150-9. Rayan Kanfar, et al. Intelligent seismic workflows: The power of generative ai and language models. The Leading Edge , 44(2):142–151, 2025. doi: 10.1190/tle44020142.1. Yukun Ren et al. Seismology modeling agent: A smart assistant for geophysical researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14429 , 2025. Thilo Wrona, et al. 3d seismic interpretation with deep learning: A brief introduction. The Leading Edge , 40(7): 524–532, 2021. doi: 10.1190/tle40070524.1. Yihuai Lou, et al. Seismic horizon picking by integrating reflector dip and instantaneous phase attributes. Geophysics ,85(2):O37–O45, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0303.1. Haibin Di, et al. Using relative geologic time to constrain convolutional neural network-based seismic interpretation and property estimation. Geophysics , 87(2):IM25–IM35, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0257.1. Jintao Li and Xinming Wu. Memory-efficient full-volume inference for large-scale 3d dense prediction without performance degradation. Communications Engineering , 2025. Yimin Dou, et al. Learning stratigraphically consistent relative geologic time from 3d seismic data via sinusoidal mapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01273 , 2026. Augustine Ifeanyi Chinwuko, et al. Coblending of seismic attributes for interpretation of channel geometries in rence field of niger delta, nigeria. Interpretation , 3(4):T183–T195, 2015. doi: 10.1190/int-2014-0083.1. Jie Qi, et al. Segmentation of salt domes, mass transport complexes on 3d seismic data volumes using kuwahara windows and multiattribute cluster analysis. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2015 , pages 1821–1825. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2015. doi: 10.1190/segam2015-5876831.1. Carlos Ramirez, et al. Salt body detection from seismic data via sparse representation. Geophysical Prospecting , 64 (2):335–347, 2016. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.12261. Asjad Amin and Mohamed Deriche. Salt-dome detection using a codebook-based learning model. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 13(11):1636–1640, 2016. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2016.2599435. A. U. Waldeland and A. H. S. S. Solberg. Salt classification using deep learning. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2017. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201700918. Haibin Di, et al. Multi-attribute k -means clustering for salt-boundary delineation from three-dimensional seismic data. Geophysical Journal International , 215(3):1999–2007, 2018b. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggy376. Haleh Karbalaali, et al. Channel boundary detection based on 2d shearlet transformation: An application to the seismic data in the south caspian sea. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 146:67–79, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo. 2017.09.001. Haleh Karbalaali, et al. Seismic channel edge detection using 3d shearlets—a study on synthetic and real channelised 3d seismic data. Geophysical Prospecting , 66(7):1272–1289, 2018. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.12629. Reza Mohebian, et al. Detection of channel by seismic texture analysis using grey level co-occurrence matrix based attributes. Journal of Geophysics and Engineering , 15(5):1953–1962, 2018. doi: 10.1088/1742-2140/aac099. Daniel R. Ebuna, et al. Statistical approach to neural network imaging of karst systems in 3d seismic reflection data. 

> 38/45

Interpretation , 6(3):B15–B35, 2018. doi: 10.1190/int-2017-0197.1. Hanpen Cai, et al. Identification of karst cave reservoirs using optimized convolutional neural network. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 , pages 2282–2286. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2997420.1. Nam Pham, et al. Automatic channel detection using deep learning. Interpretation , 7(3):SE43–SE50, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0202.1. Hang Gao, et al. Channelseg3d: Channel simulation and deep learning for channel interpretation in 3d seismic images. Geophysics , 86(4):IM73–IM83, 2021a. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0572.1. Satyakee Sen, et al. Saltnet: A production-scale deep learning pipeline for automated salt model building. The Leading Edge , 39(3):195–203, 2020. doi: 10.1190/tle39030195.1. Hao Zhang, et al. Saltisnet3d: Interactive salt segmentation from 3d seismic images using deep learning. Remote Sensing , 15(9):2319, 2023a. doi: 10.3390/rs15092319. Haibin Di and Ghassan AlRegib. A comparison of seismic saltbody interpretation via neural networks at sample and pattern levels. Geophysical Prospecting , 68(2):521–535, 2020. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.12865. Muhammad Saif ul Islam. Using deep learning based methods to classify salt bodies in seismic images. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 178:104054, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2020.104054. Satyakee Sen, et al. Regularization strategies for deep-learning-based salt model building. Interpretation , 7(4): T911–T922, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0229.1. Cable Warren, et al. Toward generalized models for machine-learning-assisted salt interpretation in the gulf of mexico. The Leading Edge , 42(6):390–396, 2023. doi: 10.1190/tle42060390.1. Yauhen Babakhin, et al. Semi-supervised segmentation of salt bodies in seismic images using an ensemble of convolutional neural networks. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 218–231. Springer International Publishing, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-33676-9_15. Zhicheng Geng, et al. Semisupervised salt segmentation using mean teacher. Interpretation , 10(3):SE21–SE29, 2022. doi: 10.1190/int-2021-0191.1. Lingxiao Jia, et al. Improvement of generalization capability of 2d salt segmentation via iterative semisupervised learning. Interpretation , 10(2):T213–T222, 2022. doi: 10.1190/int-2021-0089.1. Jiangtao Guo, et al. A deep supervised edge optimization algorithm for salt body segmentation. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 18(10):1746–1750, 2021. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2020.3007258. Keran Li, et al. Salt structure identification based on u-net model with target flip, multiple distillation and self-distillation methods. Frontiers in Earth Science , 10, 2023c. doi: 10.3389/feart.2022.1071637. Lijing Wang, et al. Semisupervised semantic segmentation for seismic interpretation. Geophysics , 88(3):IM61–IM76, 2023c. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0365.1. Hang Gao, et al. Channel simulation and deep learning for channel interpretation in 3d seismic images. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1449–1453. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3426477.1. Haishan Li, et al. A resnet-based method for complex channel interpretation in seismic volumes. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 19:1–5, 2022. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2022.3223422. Nam Pham and Sergey Fomel. Uncertainty and interpretability analysis of encoder-decoder architecture for channel detection. Geophysics , 86(4):O49–O58, 2021. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0409.1. Hassan Khasraji-Nejad, et al. Proposing a new strategy in multi-seismic attribute combination for identification of buried channel. Marine Geophysical Research , 42(4), 2021. doi: 10.1007/s11001-021-09458-6. Amir Ismail, et al. Gas channels and chimneys prediction using artificial neural networks and multi-seismic attributes, offshore west nile delta, egypt. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering , 208:109349, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2021.109349. Guoyin Zhang, et al. Seismic characterization of deeply buried paleocaves based on bayesian deep learning. Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering , 97:104340, 2022a. doi: 10.1016/j.jngse.2021.104340. Allou Koffi Franck Kouassi, et al. Identification of karst cavities from 2d seismic wave impedance images based on gradient-boosting decision trees algorithms (gbdt): Case of ordovician fracture-vuggy carbonate reservoir, tahe oilfield, tarim basin, china. Energies , 16(2):643, 2023. doi: 10.3390/en16020643. Jianping Huang, et al. Automatic karst cave detection from seismic images via a convolutional neural network and transfer learning. Frontiers in Earth Science , 10, 2023. doi: 10.3389/feart.2022.1043218. Oluwaseun Joseph Aribido, et al. Self-supervised delineation of geologic structures using orthogonal latent space projection. Geophysics , 86(6):V497–V508, 2021. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0541.1. Yunzhi Shi, et al. Interactively tracking seismic geobodies with a deep-learning flood-filling network. Geophysics , 86 

> 39/45

(1):A1–A5, 2021. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0042.1. Zhixiang Guo, et al. Cross-domain foundation model adaptation: Pioneering computer vision models for geophysical data analysis. Journal of Geophysical Research: Machine Learning and Computation , 2(1), 2025a. doi: 10.1029/ 2025JH000601. Binpeng Yan, et al. 3d karst cave recognition using transunet with dual attention mechanisms in seismic images. 

Geophysics , 90(5):IM133–IM143, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2024-0654.1. Jie Qi, et al. Semisupervised multiattribute seismic facies analysis. Interpretation , 4(1):SB91–SB106, 2016. doi: 10.1190/int-2015-0098.1. Y. Liu and Y. Wang. 3d facies classification based on seismic variation patterns. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2015. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201413173. Tao Zhao, et al. A comparison of classification techniques for seismic facies recognition. Interpretation , 3(4): SAE29–SAE58, 2015. doi: 10.1190/int-2015-0044.1. Tao Zhao and Kurt J. Marfurt. Attribute assisted seismic facies classification on a turbidite system in canterbury basin, offshore new zealand. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2015 , pages 1623–1627. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2015. doi: 10.1190/segam2015-5925849.1. Ezequiel F. Gonzalez, et al. Adding geologic prior knowledge to bayesian lithofluid facies estimation from seismic data. Interpretation , 4(3):SL1–SL8, 2016. doi: 10.1190/int-2015-0220.1. Cheng Yuan, et al. Quantitative uncertainty evaluation of seismic facies classification: A case study from northeast china. Geophysics , 81(3):B87–B99, 2016. doi: 10.1190/geo2015-0228.1. Guohe Li, et al. Recognition of stratum lithology of seismic facies based on deep belief network. In Proceedings of the 2016 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Industrial Engineering (AIIE 2016) . Atlantis Press, 2016. doi: 10.2991/aiie-16.2016.81. Thilo Wrona, et al. Seismic facies analysis using machine learning. Geophysics , 83(5):O83–O95, 2018. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0595.1. Christopher P. Ross and David M. Cole. A comparison of popular neural network facies-classification schemes. The Leading Edge , 36(4):340–349, 2017. doi: 10.1190/tle36040340.1. Tao Zhao, et al. Constraining self-organizing map facies analysis with stratigraphy: An approach to increase the credibility in automatic seismic facies classification. Interpretation , 5(2):T163–T171, 2017. doi: 10.1190/ int-2016-0132.1. Tao Zhao, et al. Seismic attribute selection for unsupervised seismic facies analysis using user-guided data-adaptive weights. Geophysics , 83(2):O31–O44, 2018. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0192.1. Mingliang Liu, et al. Seismic facies classification using supervised convolutional neural networks and semisupervised generative adversarial networks. Geophysics , 85(4):O47–O58, 2020c. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0627.1. Yuxi Zhang, et al. Seismic facies analysis based on deep learning. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 17 (7):1119–1123, 2020. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2019.2941166. Haibin Di and Dengliang Gao. Nonlinear gray-level co-occurrence matrix texture analysis for improved seismic facies interpretation. Interpretation , 5(3):SJ31–SJ40, 2017b. doi: 10.1190/int-2016-0214.1. Chengyun Song, et al. Multi-waveform classification for seismic facies analysis. Computers & Geosciences , 101:1–9, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2016.12.014. Yuji Kim, et al. Seismic-facies classification using random forest algorithm. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 . Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2998553.1. Wei Li, et al. Fusing multiple frequency-decomposed seismic attributes with machine learning for thickness prediction and sedimentary facies interpretation in fluvial reservoirs. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering , 177: 1087–1102, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2019.03.017. Jie Qi, et al. Seismic attribute selection for machine-learning-based facies analysis. Geophysics , 85(2):O17–O35, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0223.1. David Lubo-Robles, et al. Machine learning model interpretability using shap values: Application to a seismic facies classification task. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1460–1464. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3428275.1. Tao Zhao. Seismic facies classification using different deep convolutional neural networks. In SEG International Exposition and Annual Meeting , pages SEG–2018. SEG, 2018. Haoran Zhang, et al. Automatic seismic facies interpretation based on an enhanced encoder-decoder structure. In 

SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2019 , pages 2408–2412. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2019. doi: 10.1190/segam2019-3215516.1. Dario Grana, et al. A comparison of deep machine learning and monte carlo methods for facies classification from 

> 40/45

seismic data. Geophysics , 85(4):WA41–WA52, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0405.1. Yanting Duan, et al. Seismic facies analysis based on deep convolutional embedded clustering. Geophysics , 84(6): IM87–IM97, 2019. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0789.1. Pradip Mukhopadhyay and Subhashis Mallick. Bayesian deep learning for seismic facies classification and its uncertainty estimation. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2019 , pages 2488–2492. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2019. doi: 10.1190/segam2019-3216870.1. David Lubo-Robles and Kurt J. Marfurt. Independent component analysis for reservoir geomorphology and unsupervised seismic facies classification in the taranaki basin, new zealand. Interpretation , 7(3):SE19–SE42, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0109.1. Runhai Feng, et al. Lithofacies classification of a geothermal reservoir in denmark and its facies-dependent porosity estimation from seismic inversion. Geothermics , 87:101854, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2020.101854. Fangyu Li, et al. Addcnn: An attention-based deep dilated convolutional neural network for seismic facies analysis with interpretable spatial–spectral maps. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 59(2):1733–1744, 2021. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2020.2999365. Runhai Feng, et al. Bayesian convolutional neural networks for seismic facies classification. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 59(10):8933–8940, 2021b. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2020.3049012. Ekaterina Tolstaya and Anton Egorov. Deep learning for automated seismic facies classification. Interpretation , 10 (2):SC31–SC40, 2022. doi: 10.1190/INT-2021-0140.1. Harpreet Kaur, et al. A deep learning framework for seismic facies classification. Interpretation , 11(1):T107–T116, 2023. doi: 10.1190/int-2022-0048.1. Zhiguo Wang, et al. Seismic facies segmentation via a segformer-based specific encoder–decoder–hypercolumns scheme. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 61:1–11, 2023d. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3244037. Xiaoyu Chen, et al. A stronger baseline for seismic facies classification with less data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–10, 2022a. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2022.3171694. Chuanjun Zhan, et al. Subsurface sedimentary structure identification using deep learning: A review. Earth-Science Reviews , 239:104370, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2023.104370. Kyubo Noh, et al. Explainable deep learning for supervised seismic facies classification using intrinsic method. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 61:1–11, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3236500. David Lubo-Robles, et al. Quantifying the sensitivity of seismic facies classification to seismic attribute selection: An explainable machine-learning study. Interpretation , 10(3):SE41–SE69, 2022. doi: 10.1190/int-2021-0173.1. Vladimir Puzyrev and Chris Elders. Unsupervised seismic facies classification using deep convolutional autoencoder. 

Geophysics , 87(4):IM125–IM132, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0016.1. Jintao Li, et al. Unsupervised contrastive learning for seismic facies characterization. Geophysics , 88(1):WA81–WA89, 2023d. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0148.1. Haibin Di, et al. Using relative geologic time to constrain seismic facies classification using neural networks. In First International Meeting for Applied Geoscience & Energy Expanded Abstracts , pages 991–995. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2021b. doi: 10.1190/segam2021-3582241.1. Marzieh Mirzakhanian and Hosein Hashemi. Semisupervised fuzzy clustering for facies analysis using extended elastic impedance seismic attributes. Geophysics , 87(4):N75–N84, 2022. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0330.1. Kewen Li, et al. Conss: Contrastive learning method for semisupervised seismic facies classification. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , 16:7838–7849, 2023e. doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2023.3308754. Xingye Liu, et al. Semi-supervised deep autoencoder for seismic facies classification. Geophysical Prospecting , 69(6): 1295–1315, 2021. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.13106. Rachel Xu, et al. Deep semi-supervised learning using generative adversarial networks for automated seismic facies classification of mass transport complex. Computers & Geosciences , 180:105450, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2023. 105450. Ahmad Mustafa and Ghassan AlRegib. Active learning with deep autoencoders for seismic facies interpretation. 

Geophysics , 88(4):IM77–IM86, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0353.1. Yunhe Zhao, et al. Few-shot learning for seismic facies segmentation via prototype learning. Geophysics , 88(3): IM41–IM49, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0281.1. Dario Grana, et al. Markov chain monte carlo for seismic facies classification. Geophysics , 88(3):M131–M143, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2022-0442.1. Ismailalwali Babikir, et al. Evaluation of principal component analysis for reducing seismic attributes dimensions: Implication for supervised seismic facies classification of a fluvial reservoir from the malay basin, offshore malaysia. 

> 41/45

Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering , 217:110911, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2022.110911. Khalil Chikhaoui and Motaz Alfarraj. Self-supervised learning for efficient seismic facies classification. Geophysics ,89(5):IM61–IM76, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0508.1. Zhaoqi Gao, et al. Optimizing seismic facies classification through differentiable network architecture search. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–12, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3357929. Lingyun Guo, et al. Seismic facies interpretation based on super-resolution learning. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 22:1–5, 2025b. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2025.3528958. Joshua Atolagbe and Ardiansyah Koeshidayatullah. Toward user-guided seismic facies interpretation with a pre-trained large vision model. IEEE Access , 13:42965–42976, 2025. doi: 10.1109/access.2025.3547931. Na-Xia Yang, et al. An improved deep dilated convolutional neural network for seismic facies interpretation. 

Petroleum Science , 21(3):1569–1583, 2024b. doi: 10.1016/j.petsci.2023.11.027. Miao Tian, et al. Enhancing 3d seismic facies interpretation through a modified patched deep learning approach lever-aging spatio-temporal dependencies. Computational Geosciences , 29(1), 2025. doi: 10.1007/s10596-024-10334-6. P. Wu, et al. Sensitivity analysis of facies classification errors on rgt constrained deep learning method. In 85th EAGE Annual Conference & Exhibition , pages 1–5. European Association of Geoscientists & Engineers, 2024. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.202410585. Ziyad Alswaidan, et al. Geology-constrained dynamic graph convolutional networks for seismic facies classification. 

Computers & Geosciences , 184:105516, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2023.105516. Youtao Wang, et al. 3d seismic facies recognition based on region growing. Frontiers in Earth Science , 11, 2024c. doi: 10.3389/feart.2023.1297501. Fábio Júnior Damasceno Fernandes, et al. Stochastic seismic inversion and bayesian facies classification applied to porosity modeling and igneous rock identification. Petroleum Science , 21(2):918–935, 2024a. doi: 10.1016/j.petsci. 2023.11.020. Huyen Bui, et al. Introduction to special section: Seismic inversion — conventional seismic impedance inversion and advanced seismic inversion techniques: Developments, workflow, and case studies. Interpretation , 5(3):SLi–SLii, 2017. doi: 10.1190/int-2017-0612-spseintro.1. Ali Gholami. A fast automatic multichannel blind seismic inversion for high-resolution impedance recovery. Geophysics ,81(5):V357–V364, 2016. doi: 10.1190/geo2015-0654.1. Shu Li and Zhenming Peng. Seismic acoustic impedance inversion with multi-parameter regularization. Journal of Geophysics and Engineering , 14(3):520–532, 2017. doi: 10.1088/1742-2140/aa5e67. Rajan Kumar, et al. A methodology of porosity estimation from inversion of post-stack seismic data. Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering , 28:356–364, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.jngse.2015.12.028. Leandro Passos de Figueiredo, et al. Bayesian seismic inversion based on rock-physics prior modeling for the joint estimation of acoustic impedance, porosity and lithofacies. Journal of Computational Physics , 336:128–142, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2017.02.013. Ehsan Zabihi Naeini and Russell Exley. Quantitative interpretation using facies-based seismic inversion. Interpretation ,5(3):SL1–SL8, 2017. doi: 10.1190/int-2016-0178.1. Guang-Zhi Zhang, et al. Seismic fluid identification using a nonlinear elastic impedance inversion method based on a fast markov chain monte carlo method. Petroleum Science , 12(3):406–416, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s12182-015-0046-5. F. Bordignon, et al. Integration of bayesian linearized inversion into geostatistical seismic inversion. In 78th EAGE Conference and Exhibition 2016 , pages 1–5. European Association of Geoscientists & Engineers, 2016. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201600970. Sérgio Carmo, et al. Exploring seismic inversion methodologies for non-stationary geological environments: abenchmark study between deterministic and geostatistical seismic inversion. Geophysical Prospecting , 65(5): 1333–1350, 2017. doi: 10.1111/1365-2478.12489. Xianzheng Zhao, et al. Improve impedance inversion by adopting seismic sedimentary-guided a priori model. 

Interpretation , 4(3):T313–T322, 2016. doi: 10.1190/int-2015-0221.1. Duy Thong Kieu and Anton Kepic. Incorporating prior information into seismic impedance inversion using fuzzy clustering technique. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2015 , pages 3451–3455. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2015. doi: 10.1190/segam2015-5922589.1. Mohammad Ali Sebtosheikh and Ali Salehi. Lithology prediction by support vector classifiers using inverted seismic attributes data and petrophysical logs as a new approach and investigation of training data set size effect on its performance in a heterogeneous carbonate reservoir. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering , 134:143–149, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2015.08.001. Michelle Chaves Kuroda, et al. Analysis of porosity, stratigraphy, and structural delineation of a brazilian 

> 42/45

carbonate field by machine learning techniques: A case study. Interpretation , 4(3):T347–T358, 2016. doi: 10.1190/int-2016-0024.1. R. S. Muradov and A. G. Shahtakhtinskiy. Application of artificial neural networks as a tool for properties prediction using seismic data. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2017. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201702628. R. Feng, et al. Reservoir lithology classification by the hidden markov model. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2017. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201700221. Jun Cao and Baishali Roy. Time-lapse reservoir property change estimation from seismic using machine learning. 

The Leading Edge , 36(3):234–238, 2017. doi: 10.1190/tle36030234.1. Guoyin Zhang, et al. Deep learning for seismic lithology prediction. Geophysical Journal International , 2018a. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggy344. Motaz Alfarraj and Ghassan AlRegib. Petrophysical-property estimation from seismic data using recurrent neu-ral networks. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018 , pages 2141–2146. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2018. doi: 10.1190/segam2018-2995752.1. Ahmad Mustafa, et al. Estimation of acoustic impedance from seismic data using temporal convolutional network. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2019 , pages 2554–2558. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2019. doi: 10.1190/segam2019-3216840.1. Yiran Xu, et al. Physics informed neural networks for velocity inversion. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2019 , pages 2584–2588. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2019. doi: 10.1190/segam2019-3216823.1. Motaz Alfarraj and Ghassan AlRegib. Semi-supervised learning for acoustic impedance inversion. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2019 . Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2019. doi: 10.1190/segam2019-3215902.1. L. Mosser, et al. Rapid seismic domain transfer: Seismic velocity inversion and modeling using deep generative neural networks. In Proceedings . EAGE Publications BV, 2018. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.201800734. Mauricio Araya-Polo, et al. Deep learning-driven velocity model building workflow. The Leading Edge , 38(11): 872a1–872a9, 2019. doi: 10.1190/tle38110872a1.1. Yongchae Cho, et al. Quasi 3d transdimensional markov-chain monte carlo for seismic impedance inversion and uncertainty analysis. Interpretation , 6(3):T613–T624, 2018. doi: 10.1190/int-2017-0136.1. Pedro Pereira, et al. Strategies for integrating uncertainty in iterative geostatistical seismic inversion. Geophysics ,84(2):R207–R219, 2019. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0758.1. Mingliang Liu and Dario Grana. Accelerating geostatistical seismic inversion using tensorflow: A heterogeneous distributed deep learning framework. Computers & Geosciences , 124:37–45, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2018.12.007. B. She, et al. Data-driven simultaneous seismic inversion of multiparameters via collaborative sparse representation. 

Geophysical Journal International , 218(1):313–332, 2019. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggz116. Stephen Kuhn, et al. Lithologic mapping using random forests applied to geophysical and remote-sensing data: A demonstration study from the eastern goldfields of australia. Geophysics , 83(4):B183–B193, 2018. doi: 10.1190/geo2017-0590.1. Rafael Pires de Lima, et al. Convolutional neural networks as aid in core lithofacies classification. Interpretation , 7 (3):SF27–SF40, 2019. doi: 10.1190/int-2018-0245.1. Zhaoqi Gao, et al. An optimized deep network representation of multimutation differential evolution and its application in seismic inversion. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 57(7):4720–4734, 2019. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2019.2892567. Bangyu Wu, et al. Seismic impedance inversion using fully convolutional residual network and transfer learning. 

IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 17(12):2140–2144, 2020c. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2019.2963106. Vishal Das and Tapan Mukerji. Petrophysical properties prediction from prestack seismic data using convolutional neural networks. Geophysics , 85(5):N41–N55, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0650.1. Cao Wei, et al. Seismic velocity inversion based on cnn-lstm fusion deep neural network. Applied Geophysics , 18(4): 499–514, 2021. doi: 10.1007/s11770-021-0913-3. Robert Smith, et al. Robust deep learning-based seismic inversion workflow using temporal convolutional networks. 

Interpretation , 10(2):SC41–SC55, 2022. doi: 10.1190/int-2021-0142.1. Ahmad Mustafa, et al. Spatiotemporal modeling of seismic images for acoustic impedance estimation. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1735–1739. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3428298.1. Bangyu Wu, et al. Seismic impedance inversion based on residual attention network. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–17, 2022b. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2022.3193563. Jingcheng Fu, et al. Seismic impedance inversion using a joint deep learning model based on convolutional neural network and transformer. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing ,

> 43/45

16:8913–8922, 2023. doi: 10.1109/jstars.2023.3318078. Xinming Wu, et al. Deep learning for multidimensional seismic impedance inversion. Geophysics , 86(5):R735–R745, 2021b. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0564.1. Luanxiao Zhao, et al. Fluid and lithofacies prediction based on integration of well-log data and seismic inversion: A machine-learning approach. Geophysics , 86(4):M151–M165, 2021. doi: 10.1190/geo2020-0521.1. Xiu Zheng, et al. Multi-task deep learning seismic impedance inversion optimization based on homoscedastic uncertainty. In IGARSS 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium , pages 6149–6152. IEEE, 2022. doi: 10.1109/igarss46834.2022.9884853. Xudong Liu, et al. Multitask full attention u-net for prestack seismic inversion. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 20:1–5, 2023a. doi: 10.1109/LGRS.2023.3303698. Yuqing Wang, et al. Well-logging constrained seismic inversion based on closed-loop convolutional neural network. 

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 58(8):5564–5574, 2020. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2020.2967344. Jian Zhang, et al. Robust deep learning seismic inversion with a priori initial model constraint. Geophysical Journal International , 225(3):2001–2019, 2021b. doi: 10.1093/gji/ggab074. Weiqiang Zhu, et al. A general approach to seismic inversion with automatic differentiation. Computers & Geosciences ,151:104751, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2021.104751. Mingliang Liu, et al. Joint inversion of geophysical data for geologic carbon sequestration monitoring: A differentiable physics-informed neural network model. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth , 128(3), 2023b. doi: 10.1029/2022jb025372. Jian Zhang, et al. Domain knowledge-guided data-driven prestack seismic inversion using deep learning. Geophysics ,88(2):M31–M47, 2023b. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0560.1. Yuqi Su, et al. Seismic impedance inversion based on deep learning with geophysical constraints. Geoenergy Science and Engineering , 225:211671, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.geoen.2023.211671. Paula Yamada Bürkle, et al. Deep physics-aware stochastic seismic inversion. Geophysics , 88(1):R11–R24, 2023. doi: 10.1190/geo2021-0551.1. Min Jun Park and Mauricio D. Sacchi. Automatic velocity analysis using convolutional neural network and transfer learning. Geophysics , 85(1):V33–V43, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0870.1. Bangyu Wu, et al. Semi-supervised learning for seismic impedance inversion using generative adversarial networks. 

Remote Sensing , 13(5):909, 2021c. doi: 10.3390/rs13050909. Hongling Chen, et al. Seismic acoustic impedance inversion via optimization-inspired semisupervised deep learning. 

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–11, 2022b. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2021.3107257. Zhi Zhong, et al. Inversion of time-lapse seismic reservoir monitoring data using cyclegan: A deep learning-based approach for estimating dynamic reservoir property changes. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth , 125 (3), 2020. doi: 10.1029/2019jb018408. Ao Cai, et al. Wasserstein cycle-consistent generative adversarial network for improved seismic impedance inversion: Example on 3d seam model. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2020 , pages 1274–1278. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 2020. doi: 10.1190/segam2020-3425785.1. Delin Meng, et al. Seismic impedance inversion using conditional generative adversarial network. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 19:1–5, 2022. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2021.3090108. Yu-Qing Wang, et al. Seismic impedance inversion based on cycle-consistent generative adversarial network. Petroleum Science , 19(1):147–161, 2022c. doi: 10.1016/j.petsci.2021.09.038. Zhaoqi Gao, et al. Large-dimensional seismic inversion using global optimization with autoencoder-based model dimensionality reduction. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 59(2):1718–1732, 2021b. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2020.2998035. Odd Kolbjørnsen, et al. Bayesian seismic inversion for stratigraphic horizon, lithology, and fluid prediction. Geophysics ,85(3):R207–R221, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2019-0170.1. Qiming Ma, et al. Ub-net: Improved seismic inversion based on uncertainty backpropagation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 60:1–11, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3174911. Wenlong Wang and Jianwei Ma. Velocity model building in a crosswell acquisition geometry with image-trained artificial neural networks. Geophysics , 85(2):U31–U46, 2020. doi: 10.1190/geo2018-0591.1. Si-Bo Zhang, et al. A comparison of deep learning methods for seismic impedance inversion. Petroleum Science , 19 (3):1019–1030, 2022b. doi: 10.1016/j.petsci.2022.01.013. Peng Li, et al. Probabilistic physics-informed neural network for seismic petrophysical inversion. Geophysics , 89(2): M17–M32, 2024c. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0214.1. Yimin Dou, et al. Contrasinver: Ultra-sparse label semi-supervised regression for multidimensional seismic inversion. 

> 44/45

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–13, 2024b. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3410022. Sirous Hosseinzadeh, et al. Seismic inversion approaches for reservoir characterization: A comprehensive review. 

Journal of Applied Geophysics , 243:105953, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2025.105953. Ahsan Leisi, et al. Poro-acoustic impedance (pai) as a new and robust seismic inversion attribute for porosity prediction and reservoir characterization. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 223:105351, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo. 2024.105351. Zhiguo Fu, et al. Using the wavelet transform for seismic wave impedance inversion. Geophysics , 89(5):R387–R397, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0415.1. Nitin Verma, et al. Seismic inversion based on principal component analysis and probabilistic neural network for prediction of porosity from post-stack seismic data. Earth Science Informatics , 18(1), 2025. doi: 10.1007/ s12145-024-01504-2. Yongjian Zhou, et al. Gamma log inversion of seismic data based on transformer with stratigraphic position encoding. 

IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 22:1–5, 2025. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2025.3535723. Jian Zhang, et al. Joint physics and model-guided pre-stack seismic inversion using double dual neural network. 

Petroleum Science , 2025b. doi: 10.1016/j.petsci.2025.09.008. Xinyan Li, et al. Seismic inversion for fracture properties using model-data dual-driven network. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 63:1–9, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3591562. Chunyu Ning, et al. Transformer and convolutional hybrid neural network for seismic impedance inversion. 

IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , 17:4436–4449, 2024. doi: 10.1109/jstars.2024.3358610. Liuqing Yang, et al. Hctnet: Robust prestack seismic inversion using a hybrid convolutional transformer. Geophysics ,90(4):N17–N32, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2024-0015.1. Kewen Li, et al. Transinver: 3d data-driven seismic inversion based on self-attention. Geophysics , 89(1):WA127– WA141, 2024d. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0144.1. Hui Sun, et al. Seismic inversion based on fusion neural network for the joint estimation of acoustic impedance and porosity. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–10, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3426563. Bangli Zou, et al. The domain adversarial and spatial fusion semi-supervised seismic impedance inversion. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–15, 2024. doi: 10.1109/tgrs.2023.3336392. Fábio Júnior Damasceno Fernandes, et al. Cycle-consistent convolutional neural network for seismic impedance inversion: An application for high-resolution characterization of turbidites reservoirs. Geoenergy Science and Engineering , 235:212709, 2024b. doi: 10.1016/j.geoen.2024.212709. Xiaofang Liao and Junxing Cao. Inverdiff: Seismic impedance inversion using a deep diffusion model. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 22:1–5, 2025. doi: 10.1109/lgrs.2025.3582929. C. Song, et al. Seismic impedance inversion based on conditional diffusion probabilistic model. In 85th EAGE Annual Conference & Exhibition , pages 1–5. European Association of Geoscientists & Engineers, 2024. doi: 10.3997/2214-4609.202410147. Amin Arabpour, et al. Bayesian seismic inversion by residual flow. Geophysics , 90(5):R345–R362, 2025. doi: 10.1190/geo2023-0669.1. Heidi Kjønsberg, et al. Bayesian seismic 4d inversion for lithology and fluid prediction. Geophysics , 89(6):R551–R567, 2024. doi: 10.1190/geo2024-0092.1. Seokjoon Moon, et al. Stochastic seismic acoustic impedance inversion via a markov-chain monte carlo method using a single gpu card. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 224:105357, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2024.105357. Daniel P Huttenlocher, et al. Comparing images using the hausdorff distance. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 15(9):850–863, 1993. Pablo Arbeláez, et al. Contour detection and hierarchical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 33(5):898–916, 2011. Zhou Wang, et al. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 13(4):600–612, 2004. Richard Zhang, et al. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR , pages 586–595, 2018b.