Title: Decoupled Latent Optimization of Diffusion Models for Full Waveform Inversion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14139v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:36:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Decoupled Latent Optimization of Diffusion Models for Full Waveform Inversion 

Chen Min 1 and Zheng Ma ∗1,2 1School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 

> 2

CMA-Shanghai, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 

Abstract 

Full waveform inversion (FWI) recovers subsurface velocity from seismic recordings by solving a severely ill-posed, nonconvex PDE-constrained optimization. Classical regularizers stabilize the inversion but fail to reproduce realistic geological structures; recent diffusion-prior methods improve realism at the cost of a fragile trade-off between data fidelity and prior consistency. We propose Decoupled Latent Optimization (DLO), which relaxes the standard latent-optimization formulation into a quadratic-penalty objective over an auxiliary physical variable and a latent variable. The data-fidelity gradient acts in physical space, the diffusion sampler contributes only through a decoded prior sample, and the standard smoothed-velocity initialization of clas-sical FWI is preserved. On the OpenFWI benchmark, DLO outperforms classical regularizers and existing diffusion-based methods under clean, noisy, and missing-trace acquisitions. The prior, trained on 70 × 70 OpenFWI models, transfers directly to the Marmousi and Overthrust benchmarks, where DLO recovers intricate fault structures and remains robust to initialization smoothing and measurement noise. 

Keywords: Full Waveform Inversion; Diffusion Model; PDE-governed Inverse Problem; Seis-mic Imaging 

# 1 Introduction 

Inverse problems governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) play a central role across science and engineering, encompassing medical imaging, fluid dynamics, and geophysical exploration [1, 2]. A prototypical and particularly demanding instance is seismic inversion, which is widely used to reconstruct quantitative subsurface models from wavefield recordings collected at the surface and supports applications ranging from resource exploration to seismic-hazard assessment and environ-mental monitoring [3, 4]. Over the past decades, a number of methods have been developed to address this problem, including velocity analysis on stacked traces [5], traveltime tomography and migration-based methods [6, 7], and Born-approximation linearized inversion [8, 9]. Among these methods, full-waveform inversion (FWI) [10, 11, 12, 13] is set apart by its ability to recover high-resolution subsurface structure, which it achieves by casting the inversion as a PDE-constrained optimization that exploits the full phase and amplitude content of the wavefield to align the simu-lated and observed seismograms under the wave equation [13, 14]. 

> ∗Corresponding author. E-mail: zhengma@sjtu.edu.cn

1

> arXiv:2606.14139v1 [cs.LG] 12 Jun 2026

The optimization problem underlying FWI is widely regarded as a challenging nonconvex prob-lem, owing to the nonlinearity of its forward modeling and the ill-posedness of the inverse problem itself. The associated misfit landscape is strongly nonconvex and exhibits numerous local min-ima arising from phase ambiguity and limited subsurface illumination, leaving the inversion highly sensitive to inaccuracies in the initial velocity model, measurement noise, and incomplete acqui-sitions [13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. A particularly characteristic difficulty is cycle skipping, where the gradient steers the simulated wavefield toward a match that is off by a whole cycle whenever the pre-dicted and observed traces are misaligned by more than half a period, and the optimization becomes trapped in an incorrect basin of attraction, converging to inaccurate saddle points [20, 21, 22]. To mitigate these difficulties and improve robustness against imperfect observations, a variety of remedies have been explored. Regularization-based approaches retain the standard quadratic misfit and add an explicit penalty that constrains the velocity model, with Tikhonov regulariza-tion enforcing smoothness on the recovered field [23] and total-variation regularization promoting piecewise-constant structures that preserve sharp interfaces [24, 25, 26]. By penalizing non-physical features in the recovered velocity, these regularizers stabilize the optimization and improve con-vergence accuracy, and have accordingly become standard baselines in FWI. A complementary line of work replaces the pointwise quadratic residual by misfit functionals that are less sensitive to small time and phase shifts, including multi-scale frequency continuation [27], phase-based and envelope-based misfits [28, 29], adaptive waveform inversion [30], and geometry-aware metrics based on optimal transport [31, 22]. Alongside these classical strategies, a substantial body of work has explored machine-learning approaches to FWI. Direct supervised mappings learn the inverse operator from synthetic pairs of seismograms and velocity models [32, 33, 34, 35]. These networks achieve much higher computa-tional efficiency than iterative optimization, and the training data provide implicit regularization for the ill-posed inverse problem, which yield strong empirical accuracy on FWI benchmarks. Physics-aware variants embed the wave equation directly into the learning process. Physics-informed neural networks penalize PDE residuals on collocation points [36, 37, 38], and related schemes reparame-terize the velocity field as a neural network whose weights are updated by the FWI gradient [39]. A more recent and particularly fruitful paradigm in PDE solving is operator learning, in which neural networks approximate function-to-function mappings between infinite-dimensional spaces [40, 41]. Analogous operator architectures have also been investigated for FWI [42]. Despite these advances, generalization remains the central limitation of supervised approaches. Their accuracy degrades on velocity structures unseen during training and on data contaminated by measurement noise, and the network typically must be retrained whenever the acquisition geometry changes. The rapid development of diffusion models in recent years has raised generative modeling to a new level and opened a new paradigm for solving inverse problems. By learning the score field 

∇x log pt(x) of a family of Gaussian-corrupted marginals {pt}t∈[0 ,T ], diffusion models generate sam-ples by solving the associated reverse-time stochastic differential equation that transports a stan-dard Gaussian back to the data distribution [43, 44, 45]. From an inverse-problem perspective, a pretrained diffusion model embeds a data-driven prior into the inversion that provides stronger reg-ularization than handcrafted alternatives and yields improved robustness to measurement noise and out-of-distribution observations. A wide range of diffusion-based algorithms have been witnessed in image-domain inverse problems [46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51], whereas their application to physical, PDE-governed inverse problems remains under-explored [52, 53, 54]. For FWI in particular, one line of work inserts FWI physical-constraint steps into the diffusion sampling trajectory, includ-ing DiffusionFWI and its DiffusionILVR extension [55, 56] as well as DPS variants applied to the wave-equation operator [57, 58]. However, the imposed physical-constraint steps are generally in-consistent with the Gaussian-noised marginals visited by the sampling flow, and hyperparameter 2selection that balances data-prior effectiveness against physical-constraint enforcement becomes a central difficulty. A second line of work embeds diffusion-model-based regularization terms directly into the FWI optimization objective [59, 60]. These works collectively demonstrate that diffusion priors can deliver meaningful structural information for FWI; the form in which the prior signal is extracted from the pretrained model, and the way it is injected into the inversion, remain open design choices that motivate the present work. In this paper, we develop a general framework, Decoupled Latent Optimization (DLO), that embeds a pretrained diffusion model into PDE-governed inverse problems as a regularization mech-anism. DLO introduces an auxiliary optimizable latent variable whose decoded sample approxi-mates the prior projection of the physical variable, providing a diffusion-prior regularization signal for the physical inversion. The framework inherits the strong generalization to out-of-distribution structures characteristic of diffusion-prior approaches. We validate DLO on large-scale FWI benchmarks and compare it against classical regularizers and existing diffusion-based methods. On the OpenFWI benchmark [61], DLO consistently outper-forms these baselines in reconstruction accuracy and remains robust under measurement noise and incomplete acquisitions. We further apply the framework to the Marmousi [62] and Overthrust [63] benchmarks that lie clearly outside the training distribution, and the successful reconstructions on these models imply that DLO scales to larger domains and adapts well to the complex geological structures encountered in real field data. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates FWI, reviews dif-fusion generative models, and surveys existing diffusion-based approaches for inverse problems. Section 3 presents Decoupled Latent Optimization and analyzes its convergence properties. Sec-tion 4 reports numerical experiments on the OpenFWI, Marmousi, and Overthrust benchmarks. Section 5 concludes with a discussion of limitations and future directions. Implementation details, hyperparameters, and additional experimental results are deferred to the appendices. 

# 2 Background and Preliminaries 

2.1 Full Waveform Inversion 

Full waveform inversion (FWI) recovers the subsurface velocity field from seismic wavefield mea-surements recorded at the surface [13, 2]. In the acoustic approximation, wave propagation in the subsurface domain Ω is governed by 



1

v(r)2

∂2p(r, t )

∂t 2 = ∇2p(r, t ) + s(r, t, ξ ),p(r, 0) = 0 ,pt(r, 0) = 0 .

(1) where r ∈ Ω is the spatial coordinate, t is time, ∇2 is the spatial Laplacian, v(r) is the spatially varying subsurface velocity, p(r, t ) is the pressure wavefield. The source term s(r, t, ξ ) is typically a Ricker wavelet emitted from a point source at the surface, represented as follows: 

s(r, t, ξ ) = s0(t) δ(r − ξ), (2) with s0(t) = (1 − 2π2f 2t2)e−π2f 2t2

being the amplitude of the Ricker wavelet with frequency f ,

δ being the Dirac delta function, ξ being the location of the source. Following the OpenFWI framework, we use absorbing boundary layers to simulate wave propagation in an unbounded medium, suppressing artificial reflections from the domain boundaries. 3In a typical surface acquisition the medium is probed by a set of sources {ξi}ns

> i=1

. The wavefield is observed through a measurement operator M that measures the wavefield at the receiver points 

{rj }nr 

> j=1

placed along the surface at a shallow depth, M p(r, ·, t ; v, ξ i) = {p(rj , t ; v, ξ i)}nr

> j=1

. For a source ξi, solving the wave equation (1) with velocity v yields the wavefield p(r, t ; v, ξ i), whose measurement is the simulated record. Collecting these records over all sources defines the forward operator 

F(v) =  p(rj , t ; v, ξ i) j=1 ,...,n r , i =1 ,...,n s , t ∈ [0 , T ], (3) which maps a velocity model to the corresponding wavefield sampled at every source–receiver pair. Generally, the observed data dobs are the wavefield generated by the true velocity model v∗,measured at the same receivers and corrupted by additive measurement noise, 

dobs =  p(rj , t ; v∗, ξ i) + ηi(rj , t ) j=1 ,...,n r , i =1 ,...,n s , ηi ∼ N (0 , σ 2I), (4) where ηi denotes the measurement noise at each receiver. Fig. 1 illustrates this forward-modeling and inversion setup. Traditional FWI recovers the subsurface velocity v by solving an optimization problem initial-ized from a rough velocity model (typically a smoothed approximation of the true geology). min  

> v

F(v) − dobs 2 + λ R (v), (5) where the first term measures the misfit between the observed data dobs and the simulated data 

F(v), and the second term R(v) is a regularization term weighted by λ that constrains the solution to be physically plausible and improves the convergence of the inversion. The gradient of the data misfit is usually computed via the adjoint-state method [2]. Due to the nonlinearity of the wave equation and the limited coverage of surface observations, FWI is a severely ill-posed problem whose optimization landscape contains numerous local minima (e.g., cycle-skipping [21]). Although regularization penalizes non-physical solutions and improves convergence, performance remains sensitive to the choice of initial model, the strength and form of the regularization term, and measurement noise in the observations, making accurate recovery challenging in practice. While classical regularizers such as Tikhonov [23] and Total Variation (TV) [24, 25, 26] improve inversion stability, they often fail to produce geologically realistic models: Tikhonov tends to over-smooth fine-scale features, while TV introduces staircase artifacts at smooth transitions. In recent years, deep-learning-based methods have emerged as a promising direction, leveraging large-scale data to introduce data-driven regularization that captures complex geological structures beyond the reach of handcrafted priors. 

2.2 Diffusion Generative Models 

A diffusion model defines a continuous family of Gaussian-corrupted marginals {pt}t∈[0 ,T ] by pro-gressively adding noise to clean samples x0 ∼ pdata . Under the variance-preserving (VP) corrup-tion [43, 44], 

xt = √¯αt x0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), (6) where ¯ αt ∈ (0 , 1] decreases monotonically from ¯ α0 = 1 to ¯ αT ≈ 0. Eq. (6) yields a sample xt ∼ pt at each noise level, and the family {pt}t∈[0 ,T ] can be regarded as the marginal distributions of a continuous-time forward diffusion process described by the Itˆ ostochastic differential equation [44] dx = f (x, t ) d t + g(t) d w, (7) 40 200 400 600 

Length (m) 

> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> Depth (m)

A B C D E

Velocity Model ( v)      

> 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
> Velocity (m/s)

Forward 

Modeling 

Full Waveform 

Inversion 

> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> Time (ms)

Clean Noisy 

> Source A

Missing Traces             

> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> Time (ms)
> Source B
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> Time (ms)
> Source C
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> Time (ms)
> Source D
> 0350 700
> Length (m)
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> Time (ms)
> 0350 700
> Length (m)
> 0350 700
> Length (m)
> Source E
> 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Amplitude Figure 1: Forward modeling and full waveform inversion. A velocity model (left) is excited by five surface sources A–E; the wave equation (1) propagates each source through the medium, and the resulting wavefield is recorded through time at surface receivers (right; rows are sources A–E, columns show the shot gathers under clean, noisy, and missing-trace acquisition). FWI inverts this mapping to recover v from the observed wavefield. 5where f (·, t ) is the drift coefficient, g(t) the diffusion coefficient, and w a standard Wiener process. The VP corruption (6) corresponds to the choice f (x, t ) = − 12 β(t) x and g(t) = pβ(t). Here β(t)is the continuous-time noise-rate schedule, related to the corruption coefficient ¯ αt in Eq. (6) by 

β(t) = − ˙¯αt

¯αt

, equivalently ¯ αt = exp 



−

Z t

> 0

β(s) d s



, so that the two schedules encode the same noising process. As t → T the signal-to-noise ratio of the marginal ¯αt

1 − ¯αt

decreases monotonically to zero, so that pT ≈ N (0 , I ) is a tractable Gaussian prior. A diffusion model generates samples through the reverse form of this SDE, gradually denoising a Gaussian sample xT ∼ N (0 , I ) back to the data distribution by integrating the reverse-time SDE [64] dx =  f (x, t ) − g(t)2 ∇x log pt(x) dt + g(t) d ¯ w, (8) where ¯ w is a standard Wiener process running backwards in time and d t is an infinitesimal negative timestep; the only unknown is the score ∇x log pt(x) of each marginal. We fit this score by score matching, realized by training a neural network Dθ(xt, t ) to predict the clean sample x0 from the noised observation xt through the VP denoising objective min  

> θ

E x0∼pdata , t ∼U (0 ,T ), ϵ ∼N (0 ,I )

 ω(t) ∥Dθ(xt, t ) − x0∥2 , xt = √¯αt x0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, (9) with ω(t) > 0 a weighting function; its optimum recovers E[x0 | xt] and hence the score ∇xt log pt(xt)through Tweedie’s formula. The sampling process is realized either by the reverse-time SDE (8) itself or by its equivalent probability-flow ODE derived from the Fokker–Planck equation [44], thereby transporting a stan-dard Gaussian sample to the clean data distribution. Here we consider the standard DDIM sampling process [45], a discretization of the probability-flow ODE. We introduce the notation Rθ : z 7 → x0

to represent this deterministic mapping from the initial Gaussian latent xT = z ∼ N (0 , I ) to the clean sample x0, defined by iterating 

xt−1 = √¯αt−1 Dθ(xt, t ) + p1 − ¯αt−1

xt − √¯αt Dθ(xt, t )

√1 − ¯αt

. (10) We treat Rθ as a learned generator that transports the standard Gaussian to (an approximation of) the data distribution pdata ; every output Rθ(z) is by construction a sample of the learned prior. For the specific theory and detailed derivations of diffusion models, we refer to Appendix A. 

2.3 Diffusion Priors for Inverse Problems 

Diffusion models provide an efficient and high-quality mechanism for sampling from the data prior. Embedding this pretrained prior into the solution of inverse problems, however, requires carefully designed algorithms that specify how the prior signal is extracted from the pretrained model and how it interacts with the physics-based data fidelity. Existing approaches inject the diffusion prior into inversion in several broadly different ways. 

Physical constraint embedded in the reverse sampling process. A classical realization in image-domain inverse problems is DPS [50] / ΠGDM [49], which approximate the conditional score of the noisy marginal by Bayes’ rule, 

∇xt log pt

 xt | dobs 

 = ∇xt log pt(xt) + ∇xt log pt

 dobs | xt

, (11) 6where the intractable likelihood term ∇xt log pt

 dobs | xt

 is approximated by evaluating the for-ward operator at the denoised estimate E[x0 | xt]. A separate line of work, represented by Diffu-sionFWI [55] and DiffusionILVR [56], bypasses the conditional score: instead, an FWI gradient step (or a low-pass replacement) is interleaved directly between successive denoising steps of the unconditional sampler. To respect both the prior and the observations, these methods must balance the physical constraint against the diffusion prior at every sampling step. However, this balance is fragile: the likelihood approximation is inaccurate, and the physics-based constraint is inherently inconsistent with the noise-perturbed marginals {pt} encountered during sampling. As a result, the schemes are sensitive to the choice of guidance strategy and hyperparameters, particularly for nonlinear PDE-governed inverse problems such as FWI. 

Pretrained Denoiser as a Learned Regularizer A second class of methods retains the physical-space FWI objective and introduces the diffusion prior as a regularizer evaluated through the pretrained denoiser: min  

> v

F(v) − dobs 2 + λ L v, ˜vθ(v), (12) where ˜ vθ(v) is a prior velocity field associated with the current iterate v, computed from v through one or more evaluations of the pretrained denoiser Dθ; it can be read as a denoiser-based prior estimate of v, and L penalizes deviation of v from ˜ vθ, supplying a gradient that points toward the learned manifold. Different instantiations of this framework differ in how ˜ vθ(v) is constructed from v and Dθ and in the choice of penalty L. For example, RED-diff [47] and its wave-equation counterpart RED-DiffEq [59] corrupt the current iterate v to a randomly drawn noise level t with realization ϵ and read off a single denoiser output, ˜vθ(v) := Dθ

 √¯αt v + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, t , ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), (13) with L taken from a variational lower bound on the diffusion log-likelihood. A common character-istic of both approaches is that the optimized solution is not drawn from the diffusion prior. As a result, the regularizing effect of the learned prior is indirect, and reconstruction quality can depend on the choice of regularization form, guidance schedule, and hyperparameters. 

Latent Optimization through the Sampler Another line of work, applicable to inverse prob-lems with a differentiable forward operator, replaces the unknown field by the latent input to the diffusion sampler and minimizes the data misfit through the composed map F ◦ Rθ:min  

> z

F(Rθ(z)) − dobs 2, (14) in which the sampler Rθ acts as a preconditioner that constrains every iterate Rθ(z) to lie on the learned prior manifold M =  Rθ(z) | z ∼ N (0 , I ) . This paradigm, pioneered by D-Flow [65] and DMPlug [66] for image-domain inverse problems, achieves strict prior consistency without requiring a hand-designed regularizer or a guidance schedule. However, for physical inverse problems governed by partial differential equations such as FWI, directly applying the latent-optimization formulation of Eq. (14) faces two fundamental obstacles. First, the forward operator F involves solving a strongly nonlinear PDE; composing it with the sampler Rθ chains two nonlinear maps, and the resulting loss landscape combines the cycle-skipping minima of classical FWI with the nonconvexity introduced by backpropagation through the PF-ODE. This introduces additional saddle points and destabilizes gradients. Second, classical FWI relies on a physically informed initialization—typically a smoothed version of the true velocity—to land in a favorable basin of attraction. The strict latent formulation, however, constrains every 7iterate to the learned prior manifold M and precludes such physical-space initialization: the natural choice z ∼ N (0 , I ) produces only random prior samples, yielding optimization that is sensitive to the initial seed. These challenges motivate the decoupled formulation we introduce in the next section. 

# 3 Decoupled Latent Optimization for FWI 

To solve highly nonlinear and ill-posed inverse problems such as FWI, and to address these two obstacles, we develop Decoupled Latent Optimization (DLO). We begin by observing that the latent-optimization problem (14) is equivalent to the equality-constrained formulation min  

> v, z

F(v) − dobs 2 subject to v = Rθ(z), (15) since the constraint eliminates the auxiliary variable v and recovers Eq. (14) exactly. We then relax the hard constraint v = Rθ(z) by introducing a quadratic penalty term, yielding the decoupled objective min  

> v, z

F(v) − dobs 2 + λ v − Rθ(z) 2, (16) where λ > 0 is a fixed penalty parameter. Eq. (16) is the standard quadratic penalty method [67] applied to the constrained problem (15); a rigorous analysis of the relationship between the two formulations is given in Section 3.2. This decoupling avoids gradient backpropagation through the composed PDE-solver–sampler chain and permits flexible physical-space initialization. The z-update searches for the projection of 

v onto the prior manifold M, while the physics-based optimization of v is regularized by the prior velocity field Rθ(z). In practice, we initialize v with a Gaussian-smoothed version of the true velocity (the standard starting point in classical FWI) and draw z(0) ∼ N (0 , I ). The penalty parameter λ is held fixed, avoiding the progressive ill-conditioning that arises when λ is driven to infinity in classical penalty schemes. 

3.1 Alternating Optimization 

In practice we minimize Eq. (16) by alternating gradient descent on v and z. At iteration k, the physical variable v is updated by 

Lv

 v; z(k) = F(v) − dobs 2 + λ v − Rθ(z(k)) 2, (17) whose gradient with respect to v is 

∇vLv = ∇v F(v) − dobs 2 + 2 λ v − Rθ(z(k)), (18) where the data-misfit gradient is computed efficiently by the adjoint-state method [2]. The v-update is then 

v(k+1) = v(k) − ηv ∇vLv

 v(k); z(k). (19) Given the updated physical variable v(k+1) , the latent variable z is updated by minimizing the coupling loss 

Lz

 z; v(k+1)  = Rθ(z) − v(k+1) 2. (20) 8To compute the gradient of this objective, we backpropagate through the deterministic DDIM chain. Let the sampler be unrolled over a decreasing sequence of timesteps T = t0 > t 1 > · · · >tn = 0. Differentiating the DDIM update (10) with respect to xti gives the per-step Jacobian 

∂x ti−1

∂x ti

=

p¯αti−1 −√¯αti

p1 − ¯αti−1

√1 − ¯αti

 ∂D θ(xti , t i)

∂x ti

+

p1 − ¯αti−1

√1 − ¯αti

I. (21) The Jacobian of the full sampler Rθ : xT 7 → x0 is then the product of per-step Jacobians, 

∂R θ(z)

∂z =

> n

Y

> i=1

∂x ti−1

∂x ti

, (22) which is evaluated by automatic differentiation through the unrolled computation graph. With a small number of steps ( n = 3), computing this gradient to optimize the initial noise z effectively searches for the projection of the physical velocity v onto the prior manifold M. The z-update then reads 

z(k+1) = z(k) − ηz ∇z Rθ(z(k)) − v(k+1) 2. (23) The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Decoupled Latent Optimization (DLO) for FWI 

Require: observed data dobs ; forward operator F; pretrained DDIM sampler Rθ with schedule 

{ti}ni=0 ; regularization weight λ; learning rates ηv, η z ; smoothed initial velocity v(0) ; number of outer iterations K. 

> 1:

z(0) ∼ N (0, I ) {latent initialization (sole source of randomness) } 

> 2:

for k = 0 , . . . , K − 1 do  

> 3:

v(k+1) ← v(k) − ηv ∇vLv

 v(k); z(k) {v-step on Eq. (17) } 

> 4:

z(k+1) ← z(k) − ηz ∇z Lz

 z(k); v(k+1)  {z-step on Eq. (20) } 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

return ˆv = v(K)

Since DDIM is the deterministic discretization of the probability-flow ODE, the reconstruction ˆ v

is deterministic with respect to the initial latent vector z(0) ∼ N (0 , I ). Drawing z(0) independently from N (0 , I ) therefore induces a distribution over data-consistent velocity models, which is the basis of the uncertainty quantification in Section 4.3. A schematic overview of the DLO procedure is provided in Fig. 2; implementation details, hyperparameter settings, and computational cost are given in Appendix B. 

3.2 Convergence of the Penalty Relaxation 

The DLO formulation (16) replaces the strictly constrained latent optimization (14) with the penalty objective Φλ(v, z ) = F(v) − dobs 2 + λ v − Rθ(z) 2, (24) which penalizes deviation of the physical velocity v from the decoded prior sample Rθ(z). This section provides a rigorous justification for the penalty relaxation by establishing that, as λ → ∞ ,the minimizers of Φ λ converge to minimizers of the original constrained problem min v ∥F (v)−dobs ∥2

subject to v = Rθ(z). The argument follows the standard quadratic penalty method framework [67]. We write the data-misfit functional as J (v) = ∥F (v) − dobs ∥2, which is continuous whenever the forward PDE operator F is well-posed. The DDIM sampler Rθ : Rd → Rn is a composition 9Figure 2: An overview of Decoupled Latent Optimization for full waveform inversion. Top: the evolution of the physical velocity v and the prior velocity vgen = Rθ(z) over the course of the inversion. Bottom: a detailed view of a single iteration, showing the alternating v-update and z-update. of affine transforms and pretrained neural-network evaluations and is therefore continuous. The constrained problem and its optimal value are 

J ∗ = inf  

> v, z

{ J (v) | v = Rθ(z) } = inf  

> z

J (Rθ(z)) . (25) We assume the feasible set is nonempty and J ∗ > −∞ .

Proposition 3.1 (Exact minimization) . Let {λk}∞ 

> k=0

be a positive sequence with λk → ∞ , and for each k let 

(vk, z k) ∈ arg min 

> v, z

J (v) + λk ∥v − Rθ(z)∥2. (26) 

Assume that a global minimizer exists for each k. Then any limit point of {(vk, z k)} is a global minimizer of the constrained problem (25) , i.e. it satisfies ¯v = Rθ(¯ z) and J (¯ v) = J ∗.Proof. Let (¯ v, ¯z) be a limit point of {(vk, z k)} and pass to a convergent subsequence ( vk, z k) →

(¯ v, ¯z). Since ( vk, z k) is a global minimizer of Φ λk ,

J (vk) + λk ∥vk − Rθ(zk)∥2 ≤ J (v) + λk ∥v − Rθ(z)∥2 ∀ (v, z ). (27) Restricting the right-hand side to feasible pairs, for which v = Rθ(z) and the penalty term vanishes, yields J (vk) + λk∥vk − Rθ(zk)∥2 ≤ J (v) for every feasible ( v, z ), and taking the infimum over all such pairs gives 

J (vk) + λk ∥vk − Rθ(zk)∥2 ≤ J ∗. (28) 10 In particular, the nonnegativity of the penalty term implies J (vk) ≤ J ∗ for all k.Rearranging (28) yields the bound 0 ≤ ∥ vk − Rθ(zk)∥2 ≤ J ∗ − J (vk)

λk

. (29) Since J ∗ is finite and J (vk) is bounded above by (28), the right-hand side tends to zero as λk → ∞ ;hence ∥vk − Rθ(zk)∥ → 0. By continuity of Rθ, it follows that ∥¯v − Rθ(¯ z)∥ = 0, i.e. ¯ v = Rθ(¯ z); thus (¯ v, ¯z) is feasible for the constrained problem (25). Finally, taking limits in J (vk) ≤ J ∗ and using the continuity of J yields J (¯ v) ≤ J ∗, while feasibility gives J (¯ v) ≥ J ∗ by definition of the infimum. Hence J (¯ v) = J ∗, and (¯ v, ¯z) is a global minimizer of (25). 

Proposition 3.2 (Inexact minimization) . Assume that J and Rθ are continuously differentiable. Let {λk} be a sequence with λk → ∞ , and let {(vk, z k)} be a sequence of approximate stationary points satisfying 

∥∇ Φλk (vk, z k)∥ ≤ εk, εk → 0. (30) 

If (vk, z k) → (¯ v, ¯z), then (i) ¯v = Rθ(¯ z);(ii) the vectors μk := 2 λk(vk − Rθ(zk)) converge to ¯μ ∈ Rn, and ∇J (¯ v) + ¯ μ = 0 .Proof. The joint gradient of Φ λk with respect to ( v, z ) is 

∇Φλk (v, z ) = ∇J (v) + 2 λk(v − Rθ(z)) 

−2λk ∇Rθ(z)T(v − Rθ(z)) 

!

.

Define μk := 2 λk(vk − Rθ(zk)). Then condition (30) implies 

∇J (vk) + μk → 0, (31) 

∇Rθ(zk)Tμk → 0. (32) From (31) we have μk = −∇J (vk) + o(1). Since vk → ¯v and ∇J is continuous, ∇J (vk) →∇J (¯ v), and therefore 

μk → ¯μ := −∇J (¯ v). (33) In particular, {μk} is bounded. From the definition μk = 2 λk(vk − Rθ(zk)), 

∥vk − Rθ(zk)∥ = ∥μk∥

2λk

→ 0, (34) so by continuity of Rθ we obtain ¯ v = Rθ(¯ z), establishing (i). Finally, since Rθ is C1, ∇Rθ is continuous; together with zk → ¯z and μk → ¯μ, we may take the limit in (32) to obtain ∇Rθ(¯ z)T ¯μ = 0, while (31) gives ∇J (¯ v) + ¯ μ = 0. These are precisely the first-order necessary conditions for the constrained problem (25). 11 Remark. Proposition 3.1 shows that the DLO penalty relaxation (16) is asymptotically exact: driving λ → ∞ recovers solutions of the original constrained latent-optimization problem (14). In the DLO algorithm, λ is held fixed rather than taken to infinity, so the penalty term acts as a soft constraint whose strength is calibrated by a single hyperparameter. The constant-λ strategy avoids the progressive ill-conditioning that plagues classical penalty schemes when the penalty parameter grows without bound [67] and in practice a moderate value of λ is sufficient to steer the physical inversion toward the learned velocity manifold while preserving the numerical stability of the alternating gradient updates. Proposition 3.2 further confirms that the convergence behaviour is robust to the inexact subproblem solves inherent in the finite-step alternating optimization used by DLO. 

# 4 Numerical Experiments 

We validate DLO on the OpenFWI benchmark [61] (Section 4.2), examine its uncertainty quantifi-cation behaviour induced by the stochasticity of the latent sampler (Section 4.3), and finally test its out-of-distribution generalization on the Marmousi [62] and Overthrust [63] models (Section 4.4). Implementation details, including pretraining of the diffusion prior (Appendix B.1), forward solver of wave equation (Appendix B.2), the hyperparameter settings (Appendix B.3), the protocols used to replicate every baseline (Appendix B.4), and the computational cost analysis (Appendix B.5) are deferred to the appendix. 

4.1 Evaluation Metrics 

We assess reconstruction quality with three standard metrics computed in the normalized [ −1, 1] velocity domain: the root mean square error (RMSE), the mean absolute error (MAE), and the structural similarity index measure (SSIM). Let {xi}Ni=1 and {ˆxi}Ni=1 denote the ground-truth and recovered velocity models over the N -pixel spatial domain. RMSE and MAE measure point-wise discrepancies and are defined by RMSE = 

r 1

N

PNi=1 (xi − ˆxi)2, MAE = 1

N

PNi=1 xi − ˆxi , (35) with RMSE emphasizing larger errors and MAE capturing average deviations. SSIM [68] compares structural and perceptual similarity between x and ˆ x, taking values in [0 , 1] where higher is better, SSIM( x, ˆx) = (2 μxμˆx + C1) (2 σxˆx + C2)(μ2 

> x

+ μ2ˆx + C1) ( σ2 

> x

+ σ2ˆx + C2) , (36) where μ and σ2 denote local means and variances, σxˆx the local covariance, and C1, C 2 small numerical-stability constants. Local statistics are evaluated on an 11 × 11 sliding window and averaged over the image to give the final score. RMSE and MAE quantify overall intensity errors, whereas SSIM captures perceptual and structural consistency, jointly providing complementary views of reconstruction quality. 

4.2 Validation on OpenFWI Datasets 

OpenFWI [61] is a collection of large-scale, multi-structural benchmark datasets that provide paired velocity models and simulated seismic recordings across a broad range of synthetic subsurface ge-ologies, and it has become the standard testbed for diffusion-based FWI. We select four represen-tative families from the benchmark whose velocity fields cover complementary geological regimes: 12 FlatVel-B (FV-B), whose velocity fields consist of horizontally layered structures with sharp veloc-ity contrasts across flat interfaces; FlatFault-B (FF-B), whose velocity fields contain horizontally layered backgrounds disrupted by planar faults that introduce piecewise discontinuities; CurveVel-B (CV-B), whose velocity fields exhibit curved, dipping layers with smooth lateral velocity variations; and CurveFault-B (CF-B), whose velocity fields combine curved layered structures with complex curved fault networks. We compare DLO against the following baselines: standard FWI with-out regularization, FWI with Tikhonov regularization [23], FWI with total variation (TV) [24], DiffusionFWI [55], and RED-DiffEq [59], the state-of-the-art among diffusion-based FWI methods. For each family we independently train a variance-preserving diffusion model on its training set following DDPM [43], and reuse the trained model for every diffusion-based method evaluated on that family. The network architecture, noise schedule, and training hyperparameters are detailed in Section B.1. Fig. 3 shows ground-truth velocity models from each family alongside samples generated by the corresponding diffusion prior, confirming that the learned generators reproduce the geological characteristics of the four families. 

Figure 3: Comparison between velocity models from training set (left) and unconditionally gener-ated samples from each pretrained diffusion model (right) 

4.2.1 Clean Seismic Data 

We evaluate every method on 100 velocity–waveform pairs drawn from the test set of each family; all reported metrics (defined in Section 4.1) are averages over these 100 samples within the cor-responding subdataset. All optimization-based methods are initialized from a Gaussian-smoothed ground-truth velocity with standard deviation σ = 10 and optimized for 300 iterations for a fair 13 comparison. For DiffusionFWI [55], we follow its official repository settings: the reverse process starts from the intermediate noise level t = 100 and performs 10 FWI optimization steps between consecutive diffusion steps. For RED-DiffEq [59], we adopt its original hyperparameter settings and optimize for 300 iterations. We provide detailed settings of the numerical scheme of the acous-tic wave-equation forward solver in Appendix B.2, and the hyperparameter settings of all these experiments are specifically discussed in Appendix B.3. Fig. 4 shows representative reconstructions across the four families, while Fig. 5 provides a quan-titative comparison of the metrics. Unregularized FWI produces large errors with non-geological discontinuous artifacts that violate the layered structure of the true models. TV and Tikhonov regularization partially alleviate these instabilities, but Tikhonov over-smooths the resulting recon-structions while TV preserves sharp boundaries and performs quantitatively well on datasets whose gradients are naturally sparse, such as FV-B, yet introduces visible artifacts elsewhere, and neither of these classical regularizers are capable of recovering the fine-scale detail of complex velocity models. For diffusion-based methods, DiffusionFWI embeds the prior effectively on simple layered struc-tures, but lacks the capacity to capture complex faults and fine-scale details; on the curved-boundary families it exhibits visible artifacts, and its inversion quality is sensitive to the smoothing hyperparameters in the sampling trajectory. RED-DiffEq produces inversion results that are closer to the ground truth with fewer artifacts, particularly on the CV-B and CF-B families. DLO further exhibits a more stable prior-preserving capability, similarly captures discontinuous features such as faults, and more accurately characterizes deep structures far from the surface; it delivers the best metrics on CV-B, CF-B, and FF-B, and on FV-B it ranks second only to DiffusionFWI. 

Figure 4: OpenFWI clean-data qualitative comparison. Representative reconstructions across CF-B, FV-B, FF-B, and CV-B for the ground truth, the smoothed initial model, and every baseline alongside DLO. 14 Figure 5: OpenFWI clean-data quantitative comparison. Normalized MAE, RMSE, and SSIM averaged over 100 test samples per family. Within each metric block, the 2 ×2 grid arranges CV-B (top-left), CF-B (top-right), FF-B (bottom-left), and FV-B (bottom-right). Error bars indicate one standard deviation. Arrows next to each metric name indicate the preferred direction (↓ lower is better, ↑ higher is better). 

4.2.2 Noisy Seismic Data 

We next assess robustness to additive measurement noise. Following [59], we perturb the seismic data with independent Gaussian noise at three standard deviations, σ ∈ { 0.1, 0.3, 0.5}, correspond-ing to average per-sample signal-to-noise ratios of 24 .2 dB, 14 .6 dB, and 10 .2 dB across the 400 test samples. All methods share the same hyperparameter settings and initialization as in the clean-data scenario. The comparison results of the Gaussian-noise corrupted scenario are summarized in Fig. 6. Unregularized FWI and Tikhonov-regularized FWI degrade sharply with increasing σ, developing pronounced non-physical artifacts in regions of low data sensitivity. TV regularization substantially suppresses these artifacts but introduces a clearly visible staircase pattern, particularly on the smooth-gradient families, so the trade-off between artifact suppression and structural fidelity is unfavorable. Among the diffusion-based methods, RED-DiffEq and DLO are markedly robust to noise: the learned prior suppresses noise-induced fluctuations that lie outside the geological manifold, and their metrics degrade only mildly even at σ = 0 .5. DiffusionFWI, in contrast, performs competitively under clean data and low noise, but as the noise level increases its reconstructions develop large-area artifacts and non-prior features that deviate from the geological structures learned by the diffusion model. DLO consistently achieves the best inversion metrics across the vast majority of experimental scenarios and noise levels. Under noise-corrupted conditions, DLO maintains its data-prior-driven inversion paradigm, demonstrating faithful recovery of fine-scale velocity details and accurate reconstruction of layered and complex boundary structures. 15 (a)

(b)

Figure 6: OpenFWI noisy-data results (Gaussian noise). (a) Representative single-sample reconstructions on CF-B at three noise levels ( σ = 0 .10 , 0.30 , 0.50); the leftmost column shows the noisy shot gather, the second column the ground-truth velocity, and the remaining columns the reconstructions from each method. ( b) Normalized MAE, RMSE, and SSIM as a function of the Gaussian noise standard deviation, averaged over 100 test samples per family. 16 4.2.3 Seismic Data with Missing Traces 

We finally evaluate the methods under incomplete acquisitions in which a fixed subset of receivers is removed from every shot gather. We consider three settings corresponding to slight , half , and 

most-missing acquisitions: 10, 35, and 60 of the 70 traces are removed, which discards 14 .3%, 50 .0%, and 85 .7% of the available recordings, respectively; the missing receiver indices are kept identical across shots to mimic a realistic sensor-failure scenario. Performance under missing traces is reported in Fig. 7. Almost every method degrades mono-tonically as the fraction of missing traces grows, but the diffusion-based methods are noticeably more robust than the non-prior baselines. RED-DiffEq and DLO retain a coherent prior-consistent structure in the slight- and half-missing regimes, and even in the most-missing setting they avoid the conspicuous artifacts seen in the other methods while preserving the dominant geological fea-tures. Standard FWI and the classical-regularization baselines, in contrast, exhibit pronounced artifacts and a global loss of fine-scale detail across the velocity field as soon as the acquisition is meaningfully sparsified. Taken together with the noisy-data experiments of Section 4.2.2, these results demonstrate that DLO remains effective on the more realistic acquisitions encountered in practice, including both heavily sparsified and noise-contaminated recordings. 

4.3 Sensitivity to Latent Initialization 

DLO is a deterministic method whose optimization result depends only on the choice of hyperpa-rameters and the initialization of the physical velocity v and the latent variable z. To evaluate the sensitivity of DLO to the random initialization of the latent variable, we conduct an experiment on the OpenFWI test set. For each sample, we generate 20 random initializations of z(0) ∼ N (0 , I ); we take the ensemble mean over the 20 runs as the final prediction and report the standard deviation across runs as a measure of initialization-induced uncertainty. Fig. 8 indicates that the per-pixel ensemble standard deviation is primarily concentrated along fault interfaces and geological discontinuities, as well as in regions where the absolute error is larger, such as deeper layers with limited seismic illumination. The spatial correspondence between the standard deviation and the absolute error confirms that the initialization-induced uncertainty is positively correlated with the inversion error. To quantitatively assess the correspondence between initialization-induced uncertainty and inversion error, we compute the per-pixel Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients between the ensemble standard deviation and the absolute error of the ensemble mean, separately for each of the 40 test samples. Across all samples, the mean Spearman rank correlation is 0 .6454 and the mean Pearson correlation is 0 .6282, both significantly positive ( p < 10 −26 , one-sample t-test against zero). All 40 samples yield positive correlations, confirming that the initialization-induced uncertainty and the reconstruction error are robustly co-oriented: pixels where the ensemble varies more across independent runs are also pixels where the prediction tends to deviate more from the ground truth. Fig. 9 shows the pixel-level joint distribution of ensemble standard deviation and absolute error for each dataset. The high-density region consistently follows a positive trend, independently confirming that larger initialization-induced uncertainty reliably indicates larger reconstruction error at the pixel level. Across all 40 test samples, the mean within-sample standard deviation of RMSE, MAE, and SSIM are 0 .0218, 0 .0146, and 0 .0285, respectively. These results confirm that DLO yields consistent reconstructions across different initializations of z(0) , while the positively correlated ensemble uncertainty provides a reliable indicator of local reconstruction quality that requires no additional computation beyond the ensemble itself. 17 (a)

(b)

Figure 7: OpenFWI missing-trace results. (a) Representative single-sample reconstructions on CF-B with 10, 35, and 60 of the 70 receivers removed; the leftmost column shows the masked shot gather, the second column the ground-truth velocity, and the remaining columns the reconstructions from each method. ( b) Normalized MAE, RMSE, and SSIM as a function of the number of missing traces, averaged over 100 test samples per family. 18 FlatVel-B    

> Ground Truth Ensemble Mean Ensemble Std Absolute Error
> FlatFault-B CurveVel-B CurveFault-B

Figure 8: Sensitivity of DLO to the latent initialization z(0) . Each row shows one represen-tative sample per OpenFWI dataset. Columns (left to right): ground truth; ensemble mean over 20 independent z(0) draws; per-pixel ensemble standard deviation; absolute error between ensemble mean and ground truth. Uncertainty is localized at geological boundaries, while the bulk velocity structure is robustly recovered across all initializations. 19 Figure 9: Pixel-level ensemble standard deviation versus absolute error, aggregated over all test samples per dataset. The high-density region exhibits a clear positive trend across all four geological families, further corroborating the per-sample correlation results. 20 4.4 Validation on the Marmousi and Overthrust Benchmarks 

To probe generalization beyond the OpenFWI training distribution, we extend the experiments to the Marmousi [62] and Overthrust [63] velocity models. Marmousi is a 2D synthetic acoustic model built after the Cuanza basin (Angola), with strongly dipping curved layers cut by a dense fault network; the SEG/EAGE Overthrust model represents a thrust-belt setting with overthrust sheets and high-velocity carbonate units beneath an erosional surface. Both targets differ markedly from the OpenFWI prior families, so these experiments test whether our method extends to substantially more complex geology and whether out-of-distribution inversion is feasible with a diffusion prior reused as-is. Representative reconstructions at σinit = 20 on clean data are shown in Figs. 10 and 11, and the corresponding metrics are the clean column of Figs. 12 and 13. DLO faithfully recovers the geological character of both targets, restoring fault structures, dipping interfaces, and the discon-tinuous stratigraphy that the classical regularizers blur away, and it attains the best MAE, RMSE, and SSIM among all methods on both benchmarks. RED-DiffEq substantially outperforms the classical baselines, confirming that the patched diffusion regularizer transfers meaningfully out of distribution, while DiffusionFWI lies between RED-DiffEq and the classical methods. We further test the dependence on the smoothed initial model by sweeping σinit ∈ { 24 , 28 , 32 } on noise-free data, and DLO exhibits clear insensitivity to the initialization, retaining the best metrics across every σinit on both Marmousi and Overthrust. We next assess robustness to additive Gaussian measurement noise by perturbing the seis-mic data with σ ∈ { 0.1, 0.3, 0.5} at σinit = 20 without per-condition retuning (Figs. 12 and 13). The classical baselines degrade markedly with increasing noise, developing large-amplitude arti-facts in regions of low data sensitivity. DiffusionFWI lies between the classical baselines and the prior-regularized methods on both benchmarks. DLO and RED-DiffEq both display strong noise robustness, with metric curves that stay nearly flat across the full noise range; DLO essentially maintains the same MAE, RMSE, and SSIM level as RED-DiffEq as σ grows, while retaining its advantage at the lower noise levels. Taken together, these experiments demonstrate that DLO gen-eralizes well across diverse geological scenarios and preserves high-fidelity reconstructions under the kinds of data corruption encountered in practice, underscoring its potential for real-world seismic imaging applications. 21 Figure 10: Marmousi qualitative comparison (σinit = 20 , noise-free). Ground truth, smoothed initial model, and reconstructions of every method on the 70 × 190 Marmousi bench-mark. All diffusion-based methods reuse the CurveFault-B prior trained on OpenFWI; DLO and RED-DiffEq operate on three overlapping 70 × 70 patches and DiffusionFWI uses a sliding-window adaptation, while the classical baselines act on the full rectangular field. 22 Figure 11: Overthrust qualitative comparison (σinit = 20 , noise-free). Ground truth, smoothed initial model, and reconstructions of every method on the 70 × 190 Overthrust bench-mark, under the same setup as Fig. 10. 23 Figure 12: Marmousi robustness sweep. Normalized MAE, RMSE, and SSIM as a function of the initialization-smoothing kernel σinit ∈ { 20 , 24 , 28 , 32 } on noise-free data (top) and as a function of the additive Gaussian-noise standard deviation σ ∈ { 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5} at σinit = 20 (bottom). 

Figure 13: Overthrust robustness sweep. Same sweep as Fig. 12, for the Overthrust benchmark. 24 5 Conclusion 

We proposed Decoupled Latent Optimization (DLO), a framework for embedding pretrained dif-fusion priors into PDE-governed inverse problems. DLO relaxes the standard latent-optimization formulation into a quadratic-penalty objective that decouples the physical inversion from the dif-fusion sampler. This decoupling isolates the data-fidelity gradient in physical space, removes the need to backpropagate through the composed PDE-solver–sampler chain, and permits conventional physical-space initialization. On the OpenFWI benchmark, DLO consistently outperforms classical regularizers and existing diffusion-based methods under clean, noisy, and missing-trace acquisitions. The prior, trained solely on the 70 × 70 OpenFWI velocity models, transfers without modification to the substantially larger Marmousi and Overthrust benchmarks, where DLO recovers intricate faults and dipping layers and remains robust to initialization smoothing and measurement noise. The decoupled latent-optimization principle applies broadly to PDE-governed inverse problems for which a pretrained generative prior of the unknown field is available. Extending the framework to three-dimensional geometries and to priors that capture richer geological complexity are natural directions for future work. 

# Acknowledgments 

Zheng Ma is supported by NSFC Grant No. 12531016 and Beijing Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Mathematics funding HX02023-6. Additionally, we also thank Shanghai Institute for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences (SIMIS) for their financial support. This research was funded by SIMIS under grant number SIMIS-ID-2025-ST. The authors are grateful for the resources and facilities provided by SIMIS, which were essential for the completion of this work. 

# References 

[1] Masoumeh Dashti and Andrew M Stuart. The bayesian approach to inverse problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.6989 , 2013. [2] Albert Tarantola. Inverse problem theory and methods for model parameter estimation . SIAM, 2005. [3] Zhen-dong Zhang, Erdinc Saygin, Leiyu He, and Tariq Alkhalifah. Rayleigh wave dispersion spectrum inversion across scales. Surveys in Geophysics , 42(6):1281–1303, 2021. [4] Malcolm Sambridge and Klaus Mosegaard. Monte carlo methods in geophysical inverse prob-lems. Reviews of Geophysics , 40(3):3–1, 2002. [5] AJ Berkhout. Pushing the limits of seismic imaging, part ii: Integration of prestack migration, velocity estimation, and avo analysis. Geophysics , 62(3):954–969, 1997. [6] Colin A Zelt and RB Smith. Seismic traveltime inversion for 2-d crustal velocity structure. 

Geophysical journal international , 108(1):16–34, 1992. [7] Fran¸ cois Clement, Guy Chavent, and Susana G´ omez. Migration-based traveltime waveform inversion of 2-d simple structures: A synthetic example. Geophysics , 66(3):845–860, 2001. 25 [8] JA Hudson and JR Heritage. The use of the born approximation in seismic scattering problems. 

Geophysical Journal International , 66(1):221–240, 1981. [9] Kenneth Muhumuza, Morten Jakobsen, Teemu Luostari, and TIMO L¨ ahivaara. Seismic mon-itoring of co2 injection using a distorted born t-matrix approach in acoustic approximation. 

J. Seism. Explor , 27:403–431, 2018. [10] Albert Tarantola. Inversion of seismic reflection data in the acoustic approximation. Geo-physics , 49(8):1259–1266, 1984. [11] Michael Warner, Andrew Ratcliffe, Tenice Nangoo, Joanna Morgan, Adrian Umpleby, Nikhil Shah, Vetle Vinje, Ivan ˇStekl, Llu´ ıs Guasch, Caroline Win, et al. Anisotropic 3d full-waveform inversion. Geophysics , 78(2):R59–R80, 2013. [12] Morten Jakobsen and Bjørn Ursin. Full waveform inversion in the frequency domain using direct iterative t-matrix methods. Journal of Geophysics and Engineering , 12(3):400–418, 2015. [13] J Virieux and S Operto. An overview of full-waveform inversion in exploration geophysics. 

GEOPHYSICS , 74(6), 2009. [14] Andreas Fichtner. Full seismic waveform modelling and inversion . Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. [15] R Gerhard Pratt. Seismic waveform inversion in the frequency domain; part 1, theory and verification in a physical scale model. Geophysics , 64(3):888–901, 1999. [16] Gang Yao, Nuno V da Silva, Michael Warner, Di Wu, and Chenhao Yang. Tackling cycle skipping in full-waveform inversion with intermediate data. Geophysics , 84(3):R411–R427, 2019. [17] Zhigang Zhang, Zedong Wu, Zhiyuan Wei, Jiawei Mei, Rongxin Huang, and Ping Wang. Fwi imaging: Full-wavefield imaging through full-waveform inversion. In SEG International Exposition and Annual Meeting , page D031S027R004. SEG, 2020. [18] Alireza Yazdani, Lu Lu, Maziar Raissi, and George Em Karniadakis. Systems biology informed deep learning for inferring parameters and hidden dynamics. PLoS computational biology ,16(11):e1007575, 2020. [19] Anran Jiao, Haiyang He, Rishikesh Ranade, Jay Pathak, and Lu Lu. One-shot learning for solution operators of partial differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05512 , 2021. [20] Odile Gauthier, Jean Virieux, and Albert Tarantola. Two-dimensional nonlinear inversion of seismic waveforms; numerical results. geophysics , 51(7):1387–1403, 1986. [21] Arnaud Pladys, Romain Brossier, Yubing Li, and Ludovic M´ etivier. On cycle-skipping and misfit function modification for full-wave inversion: Comparison of five recent approaches. 

Geophysics , 86(4):R563–R587, 2021. [22] Ludovic M´ etivier, Romain Brossier, Quentin M´ erigot, Edouard Oudet, and Jean Virieux. Measuring the misfit between seismograms using an optimal transport distance: Application to full waveform inversion. Geophysical Supplements to the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , 205(1):345–377, 2016. 26 [23] Amir Asnaashari, Romain Brossier, St´ ephane Garambois, Fran¸ cois Audebert, Pierre Thore, and Jean Virieux. Regularized seismic full waveform inversion with prior model information. 

Geophysics , 78(2):R25–R36, 2013. [24] Ernie Esser, Lluis Guasch, Tristan van Leeuwen, Aleksandr Y Aravkin, and Felix J Herrmann. Total variation regularization strategies in full-waveform inversion. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 11(1):376–406, 2018. [25] Youzuo Lin and Lianjie Huang. Acoustic-and elastic-waveform inversion using a modified total-variation regularization scheme. Geophysical Journal International , 200(1):489–502, 2014. [26] HS Aghamiry, A Gholami, and S Operto. Hybrid tikhonov+ total-variation regularization for imaging large-contrast media by full-waveform inversion. In SEG International Exposition and Annual Meeting , pages SEG–2018. SEG, 2018. [27] Carey Bunks, Fatimetou M Saleck, Stephane Zaleski, and Guy Chavent. Multiscale seismic waveform inversion. Geophysics , 60(5):1457–1473, 1995. [28] Ebru Bozda˘ g, Jeannot Trampert, and Jeroen Tromp. Misfit functions for full waveform inver-sion based on instantaneous phase and envelope measurements. Geophysical Journal Interna-tional , 185(2):845–870, 2011. [29] Benxin Chi, Liangguo Dong, and Yuzhu Liu. Full waveform inversion method using envelope objective function without low frequency data. Journal of Applied Geophysics , 109:36–46, 2014. [30] Michael Warner and Llu´ ıs Guasch. Adaptive waveform inversion: Theory. Geophysics ,81(6):R429–R445, 2016. [31] Yunan Yang, Bj¨ orn Engquist, Junzhe Sun, and Brittany F Hamfeldt. Application of opti-mal transport and the quadratic wasserstein metric to full-waveform inversion. Geophysics ,83(1):R43–R62, 2018. [32] Yue Wu and Youzuo Lin. Inversionnet: An efficient and accurate data-driven full waveform inversion. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging , 6:419–433, 2019. [33] Zhongping Zhang, Yue Wu, Zheng Zhou, and Youzuo Lin. Velocitygan: Subsurface velocity image estimation using conditional adversarial networks. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 705–714. IEEE, 2019. [34] Zhongping Zhang and Youzuo Lin. Data-driven seismic waveform inversion: A study on the robustness and generalization. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote sensing ,58(10):6900–6913, 2020. [35] Vladimir Kazei, Oleg Ovcharenko, Pavel Plotnitskii, Daniel Peter, Xiangliang Zhang, and Tariq Alkhalifah. Mapping full seismic waveforms to vertical velocity profiles by deep learning. 

Geophysics , 86(5):R711–R721, 2021. [36] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics , 3(6):422–440, 2021. [37] Lu Lu, Raphael Pestourie, Wenjie Yao, Zhicheng Wang, Francesc Verdugo, and Steven G Johnson. Physics-informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse design. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 43(6):B1105–B1132, 2021. 27 [38] Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, Zhiping Mao, and George Em Karniadakis. Deepxde: A deep learning library for solving differential equations. SIAM review , 63(1):208–228, 2021. [39] Xiong-Bin Yan, Keke Wu, Zhi-Qin John Xu, and Zheng Ma. An unsupervised deep learning approach for the wave equation inverse problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04531 , 2023. [40] Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, Guofei Pang, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. 

Nature machine intelligence , 3(3):218–229, 2021. [41] Min Zhu, Shihang Feng, Youzuo Lin, and Lu Lu. Fourier-deeponet: Fourier-enhanced deep operator networks for full waveform inversion with improved accuracy, generalizability, and robustness. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 416:116300, 2023. [42] Xinquan Huang, Fu Wang, and Tariq Alkhalifah. Physics-informed waveform inversion using pretrained wavefield neural operators. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,2025. [43] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [44] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 , 2020. [45] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 , 2020. [46] Bahjat Kawar, Michael Elad, Stefano Ermon, and Jiaming Song. Denoising diffusion restora-tion models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:23593–23606, 2022. [47] Morteza Mardani, Jiaming Song, Jan Kautz, and Arash Vahdat. A variational perspective on solving inverse problems with diffusion models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 28027–28053, 2024. [48] Zehao Dou and Yang Song. Diffusion posterior sampling for linear inverse problem solving: A filtering perspective. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [49] Jiaming Song, Arash Vahdat, Morteza Mardani, and Jan Kautz. Pseudoinverse-guided dif-fusion models for inverse problems. In International conference on learning representations ,2023. [50] Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffu-sion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14687 ,2022. [51] Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Conditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02938 , 2021. [52] Dule Shu, Zijie Li, and Amir Barati Farimani. A physics-informed diffusion model for high-fidelity flow field reconstruction. Journal of Computational Physics , 478:111972, 2023. 28 [53] Siming Shan, Pengkai Wang, Song Chen, Jiaxu Liu, Chao Xu, and Shengze Cai. Pird: Physics-informed residual diffusion for flow field reconstruction. Acta Mechanica Sinica , 42(7):725259, 2026. [54] Sifan Wang, Zehao Dou, Siming Shan, Tong-Rui Liu, and Lu Lu. Fundiff: Diffusion models over function spaces for physics-informed generative modeling. Nature Communications , 2026. [55] Fu Wang, Xinquan Huang, and Tariq A Alkhalifah. A prior regularized full waveform inversion using generative diffusion models. IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing , 61:1– 11, 2023. [56] Mohammad H Taufik and Tariq Alkhalifah. Wavenumber-aware diffusion sampling to reg-ularize multiparameter elastic full waveform inversion. Geophysical Journal International ,240(2):1215–1233, 2025. [57] Mohammad H Taufik and Tariq Alkhalifah. Diffusion model-based posterior sampling in full waveform inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.12797 , 2025. [58] Jishen Peng, Enze Jiang, Zheng Ma, and Xiongbin Yan. Robust physics-guided diffusion for full-waveform inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16393 , 2026. [59] Siming Shan, Min Zhu, Youzuo Lin, and Lu Lu. Regularization by denoising diffusion models for solving inverse pde problems with application to full waveform inversion. Communications Physics , 2026. [60] Yuke Xie, Herv´ e Chauris, and Nicolas Desassis. Diffusion prior as a direct regularization term for fwi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10141 , 2025. [61] Chengyuan Deng, Shihang Feng, Hanchen Wang, Xitong Zhang, Peng Jin, Yinan Feng, Qili Zeng, Yinpeng Chen, and Youzuo Lin. Openfwi: Large-scale multi-structural benchmark datasets for full waveform inversion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:6007–6020, 2022. [62] Roelof Versteeg. The marmousi experience: Velocity model determination on a synthetic complex data set. The Leading Edge , 13(9):927–936, 1994. [63] F Aminzadeh, J Brac, and T Kunz. 3-d salt and overthrust models, seg/eage 3-d model. ser. 1. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, Tulsa, OK , 1997. [64] Brian D.O. Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 12(3):313–326, 1982. [65] Heli Ben-Hamu, Omri Puny, Itai Gat, Brian Karrer, Uriel Singer, and Yaron Lipman. D-flow: Differentiating through flows for controlled generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14017 , 2024. [66] Hengkang Wang, Xu Zhang, Taihui Li, Yuxiang Wan, Tiancong Chen, and Ju Sun. Dmplug: A plug-in method for solving inverse problems with diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:117881–117916, 2024. [67] Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Nonlinear Programming . Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA, 2nd edition, 1999. 29 [68] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing , 13(4):600– 612, 2004. [69] Bradley Efron. Tweedie’s formula and selection bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 106(496):1602–1614, 2011. 30 A Diffusion Model Preliminaries 

The essential definitions of the variance-preserving marginal, the denoiser Dθ, and the deterministic DDIM sampler Rθ are summarized in Section 2.2 of the main text. This appendix provides the complete mathematical derivations—the stochastic differential equation, the probability-flow ODE, Tweedie’s identity, and the DDPM training objective—for reference. A diffusion model defines a continuous family of Gaussian-corrupted marginals {pt}t∈[0 ,T ] ob-tained by progressively adding noise to clean samples x0 ∼ pdata . Under the variance-preserving (VP) corruption [43, 44], 

xt = √¯αt x0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), (37) where ¯ αt ∈ (0 , 1] decreases monotonically from ¯ α0 = 1 to ¯ αT ≈ 0, so pT ≈ N (0 , I ). Conditional on 

x0, xt is Gaussian, so the marginal density of xt is the convolution of pdata with a rescaled Gaussian kernel, 

pt(x) = 

Z

pdata (x0) N x; √¯αt x0, (1 − ¯αt) I dx0. (38) Viewing ¯ αt as a smooth function of t, the family pt(x) satisfies a drift–diffusion equation in x and 

t,

∂tpt(x) = 12 β(t)∇·  x p t(x) + ∇2pt(x), β(t) = − ˙¯αt

¯αt

. (39) The forward diffusion that induces these marginals is the Itˆ o SDE with drift − 12 β(t) x and diffusion coefficient pβ(t); sampling reverses this process, and by Anderson’s theorem [64] the reverse-time dynamics that transport the standard Gaussian pT back to the data distribution pdata are governed by the sampling SDE dx =

h

− 12 β(t) x − β(t) ∇x log pt(x)

i

dt + pβ(t) d ¯ w, (40) integrated backwards from t = T to t = 0, with ¯w a reverse-time Wiener process. The Fokker– Planck equation of this sampling SDE yields exactly the same form as Eq. (39), so it traverses the marginals (38) in reverse. The same marginals are reproduced by the equivalent deterministic probability-flow ordinary differential equation [44] dx =

h

− 12 β(t) x − 12 β(t) ∇x log pt(x)

i

dt, (41) which provides a deterministic sampler sharing the same marginals. Both the SDE and the ODE require the score ∇x log pt(x) of every noisy marginal, which by Tweedie’s identity [69] admits the conditional-expectation form 

∇xt log pt(xt) = 

√¯αt E[x0 | xt] − xt

1 − ¯αt

. (42) The conditional expectation E[x0 | xt] is approximated by a neural denoiser Dθ(xt, t ) trained by the standard denoising objective min  

> θ

E x0∼pdata , t ∼U (0 ,T ), ϵ ∼N (0 ,I )

 ω(t) ∥Dθ(xt, t ) − x0∥2 , xt = √¯αt x0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, (43) which, substituted into Eq. (42), supplies a learned score for the SDE (40) and the ODE (41). We adopt the deterministic DDIM update [45], a discretization of the probability-flow ODE (41), 

xt−1 = √¯αt−1 Dθ(xt, t ) + p1 − ¯αt−1

xt − √¯αt Dθ(xt, t )

√1 − ¯αt

, (44) 31 which, iterated from xT = z ∼ N (0 , I ) down to x0, defines a deterministic sampler Rθ : z 7 → x0

that transports the standard Gaussian to (an approximation of) pdata . We treat Rθ as the learned generator throughout the paper. 

# B Implementation Details 

B.1 Diffusion Model Pretraining 

For each of the four OpenFWI families (FV-B, FF-B, CV-B, CF-B) we independently pretrain a velocity-domain diffusion model on its training split. All four families share the same network archi-tecture, noise schedule, and training protocol; the only difference between runs is the training data. Velocity fields are normalized by y = ( v m/s − 3000) /1500, so the physical range [1500 , 4500] m/s maps to [ −1, 1]. The native velocity resolution is 70 × 70; inside the network we apply a small amount of reflection padding to 72 ×72 at the input and slice the output back to 70 ×70, so the denoiser operates on a resolution that is cleanly divisible at every downsampling stage while the externally visible velocity field remains 70 ×70 throughout pretraining and inversion. 

Network architecture. The denoiser ϵθ is a 2D U-Net (the Hugging Face Diffusers UNet2DModel )with one input and one output channel. It comprises four resolution stages with output channel widths {128 , 256 , 256 , 512 } and three downsampling steps that take the padded input from 72 ×72 through 36 × 36 and 18 × 18 down to a 9 × 9 bottleneck, mirrored by three upsampling steps in the decoder. A self-attention block is inserted at the 18 × 18 stage in both the encoder and the decoder, with the remaining stages purely convolutional, and timestep conditioning is supplied to every residual block via a sinusoidal embedding. 

Noise schedule. We use a discrete-time DDPM scheduler with T = 1000 training timesteps and a linear β schedule from β1 = 10 −4 to βT = 2 ×10 −2, yielding the VP marginals defined in Section 2.2 (see also Appendix A for the complete derivation). The full procedure for constructing the discrete schedule {βt, α t, ¯αt}Tt=1 from the two endpoint values is summarized in Algorithm 2. The network is trained to predict the injected noise ϵ by the standard DDPM noise-prediction objective. The same schedule is reused at inference time by the deterministic DDIM sampler Rθ (Section B.5), with the number of deterministic steps reduced from T = 1000 to n = 3 inside the DLO loop. 

Algorithm 2 Linear β schedule (DDPM, VP). 

Require: Total steps T = 1000, start β1 = 10 −4, end βT = 2 ×10 −2 

> 1:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 2:

βt ← β1 + t − 1

T − 1 (βT − β1) 

> 3:

αt ← 1 − βt 

> 4:

¯αt ← Qts=1 αs 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

return {βt, α t, ¯αt}Tt=1 

Training hyperparameters. We optimize the noise-prediction loss with Adam at peak learning rate 10 −4 following a cosine schedule with a 500-step linear warm-up. We train for 400 epochs on each family at batch size 32, which gives roughly 1 ,500 optimizer steps per epoch and a total of 

∼ 6 × 10 5 update steps over the 48 ,000-velocity training set per family. Training and validation 32 loss curves for the CF-B run are shown in Fig. 14; the other three families exhibit qualitatively identical behaviour. After roughly 3 ×10 5 optimizer steps the loss begins to oscillate around a slowly decreasing plateau, a common signature of the stochastic noise-prediction objective in which the per-step target ϵ is resampled and the loss therefore retains an irreducible variance even once ϵθ

has effectively converged. 

Figure 14: Diffusion pretraining loss curve (CF-B). Training and validation noise-prediction loss versus optimizer step for the CurveFault-B diffusion model. The remaining three families produce qualitatively identical curves. 

B.2 Acoustic Wave-Equation Forward Solver 

The forward operator F in Eq. (5) numerically integrates the 2D acoustic wave equation (1) with a Ricker wavelet source by a 4th-order finite-difference scheme in space and a leapfrog update in time, with a sponge absorbing layer of quadratic damping along the four exterior boundaries. Sources and receivers are uniformly distributed along the surface at fixed depths. The configuration follows the protocol used to generate the OpenFWI datasets [61], and the same parameters are reused for the Marmousi and Overthrust experiments, with the lateral extent enlarged to accommodate the wider models. Gradients of the data-misfit term with respect to the velocity model are computed by the adjoint-state method [2], which back-propagates the data residual through a single reverse-time solve of the same wave equation and contracts it with the stored forward wavefield. All parameters are summarized in Table 1. 

B.3 Hyperparameter Settings 

To ensure a fair comparison, all methods share the same hyperparameters across all scenarios. For the data-misfit term, all methods minimize the ℓ1 norm ∥F (v) − dobs ∥1 rather than the squared ℓ2

norm, as the ℓ1 loss provides greater robustness to outliers in seismic recordings. All optimization methods use the Adam optimizer with learning rate η = 0 .03, run for 300 outer iterations. DLO uses the same optimizer for the velocity field v as the other methods, plus an independent Adam optimizer for the latent variable z with a constant learning rate ηz = 0 .02. The regularization coefficients of Tikhonov ( λ = 0 .01), TV ( λ = 0 .01), and RED-DiffEq ( λ = 0 .75) follow the values reported in RED-DiffEq [59] out of empirical hyperparameter tuning, and the manifold-tracking weight of DLO is fixed at λ = 0 .5 throughout. 33 Table 1: Forward-solver configuration. The same numerical scheme, source signature, and sponge boundary are used for both benchmark families; only the horizontal extent ( nx, ng) changes between OpenFWI and the larger Marmousi/Overthrust models. Parameter Symbol OpenFWI Marmousi/Overthrust Unit Horizontal grid points nx 70 190 —Vertical grid points nz 70 70 —Grid spacing ∆x 10.0 10.0 mTime steps nt 1000 1000 —Time step size ∆t 0.001 0.001 sRecording time T 1.0 1.0 sSource frequency (Ricker) f 15.0 15.0 Hz Number of sources ns 5 5 —Number of receivers ng 70 190 —Source depth zs 10 10 mReceiver depth zg 10 10 mBoundary condition — Sponge layer (quadratic damping) —ABC layer thickness nbc 120 120 grid points Physical domain size — 700 ×700 700 ×1900 m2

Seismic data shape — (5 , 1000 , 70) (5 , 1000 , 190) —DiffusionFWI [55] follows a different optimization path, in which FWI gradient steps are in-terleaved between successive reverse-diffusion steps; we retain the protocol of the original code release, starting the reverse sampler at t = 100 on the T = 1000 schedule, inserting 10 Adam steps (learning rate η = 0 .01) between consecutive denoising steps. For the stabilization techniques in the repo (gradient smoothing, gradient normalization, and velocity-model Gaussian blur), our cross-validation across the four OpenFWI families confirms that velocity-model blur combined with gradient normalization most reliably improves performance, and we enable only these two in all reported DiffusionFWI results. 

B.4 Baseline Implementation Protocols 

All baselines operate on velocity fields normalized to [ −1, 1] by x = ( v m/s − 3000) /1500 and are initialized from a Gaussian-smoothed ground-truth model with standard deviation σinit = 10. 

Tikhonov. We apply a first-order Tikhonov regularizer that penalizes the squared gradient of the velocity model, 

RTikhonov (x) = 1

N

X

> i,j

h

(xi+1 ,j − xi,j )2 + ( xi,j +1 − xi,j )2i

, (45) where N is the number of grid points. This penalty discourages abrupt variations and yields smooth solutions at the cost of fine-scale detail. 34 Total variation. We use anisotropic TV, which promotes piecewise-constant structure and pre-serves sharp velocity discontinuities, 

RTV (x) = 1

N

X

> i,j

h

|xi+1 ,j − xi,j | + |xi,j +1 − xi,j |

i

, (46) which has a known tendency to introduce staircase artifacts in regions of smooth velocity gradient. 

RED-DiffEq. We use the denoiser-based regularizer of Eq. (13), with the time-dependent weight-ing in the original formulation replaced by a fixed coefficient λ following [59]. 

DiffusionFWI. We adapt the official implementation of [55] to our acoustic forward solver, replacing the original elastic engine while retaining the nested optimization protocol described in Section B.3. 

B.5 Computational Cost 

For stable optimization and computational efficiency, we instantiate the DDIM sampler with n = 3 deterministic steps as the prior velocity field generator. Table 2 summarizes the per-iteration runtime breakdown of DLO. Compared to a standard FWI iteration (forward PDE solver plus adjoint gradient), optimization with the additional DDIM-related operations costs roughly 220% of a standard FWI iteration under our implementation. Compared to classical FWI methods, DLO loads a pretrained diffusion model and therefore occupies additional GPU memory. Peak GPU memory usage during the DLO step is approximately 4600 MB, well below the capacity of modern GPUs. The additional computational cost and memory usage at this level are acceptable, given the inversion performance achieved by diffusion-based methods such as DLO. Table 2: Per-iteration runtime breakdown of DLO. Measured on the OpenFWI 70 ×70 velocity grid and averaged over 100 iterations; ± denotes one standard deviation. Operation Time (s) Fraction Forward PDE solver 0.0294 ± 0.0008 15 .1% DDIM fwd+bwd ( z-update) 0.0655 ± 0.0036 33 .7% DDIM decode (no grad) 0.0408 ± 0.0032 21 .0% 

v-backward (adjoint) 0.0587 ± 0.0009 30 .2% Total per DLO iteration 0.1946 ± 0.0044 100% 35